---
id: NqAyuQM7ssrftkRnXmR7t
title: 'Book Notes: Where Good Ideas Come From'
desc: ''
updated: 1636922485853
created: 1636922485853
date: '2018-04-14'
categories:
  - research
---

Tarnier stumbled across an exhibit of chicken incubators. Seeing the hatchlings totter about in the incubator’s warm enclosure triggered an association in his head, and before long he had hired Odile Martin, the zoo’s poultry raiser, to construct a device that would perform a similar function for human newborns.

So instead, Prestero and his team decided to build an incubator out of parts that were already abundant in the developing world. The idea had originated with a Boston doctor named Jonathan Rosen, who had observed that even the smaller towns of the developing world seemed to be able to keep automobiles in working order. The towns might have lacked air conditioning and laptops and cable television, but they managed to keep their Toyota 4Runners on the road. So Rosen approached Prestero with an idea: What if you made an incubator out of automobile parts?Three years after Rosen suggested the idea, the Design that Matters team introduced a prototype device called the NeoNurture. From the outside, it looked like a streamlined modern incubator, but its guts were automotive. Sealed-beam headlights supplied the crucial warmth; dashboard fans provided filtered air circulation; door chimes sounded alarms. You could power the device via an adapted cigarette lighter, or a standard-issue motorcycle battery.

Biologist Stephen Jay Gould maintained an odd collection of footware that he had purchased during his travels through the developing world, in open-air markets in Quito, Nairobi, and Delhi. They were sandals made from recycled automobile tires. As a fashion statement, they may not have amounted to much, but Gould treasured his tire sandals as a testimony to “human ingenuity.” Evolution advances by taking available resources and cobbling them together to create new uses. “The tires-to-sandals principle works at all scales and times,” Gould wrote, “permitting odd and unpredictable initiatives at any moment—to make nature as inventive as the cleverest person who ever pondered the potential of a junkyard in Nairobi.”

Stuart Kauffman has a suggestive name for the set of all those first-order combinations: “the adjacent possible.” The strange and beautiful truth about the adjacent possible is that its boundaries grow as you explore those boundaries. Each new combination ushers new combinations into the adjacent possible. Think of it as a house that magically expands with each door you open. You begin in a room with four doors, each leading to a new room that you haven’t visited yet. Those four rooms are the adjacent possible. But once you open one of those doors and stroll into that room, three new doors appear, each leading to a brand-new room that you couldn’t have reached from your original starting point. Keep opening new doors and eventually you’ll have built a palace.

The same cannot be said of Babbage’s other brilliant idea: the Analytical Engine, the great unfulfilled project of Babbage’s career, which he toiled on for the last thirty years of his life. The machine was so complicated that it never got past the blueprint stage, save a small portion that Babbage built shortly before his death in 1871. The Analytical Engine was—on paper, at least—the world’s first programmable computer. Being programmable meant that the machine was fundamentally open-ended; it wasn’t designed for a specific set of tasks, the way the Difference Engine had been optimized for polynomial equations. The Analytical Engine was, like all modern computers, a shape-shifter, capable of reinventing itself based on the instructions conjured by its programmers.

Why did the Analytical Engine prove to be such a short-term dead end, given the brilliance of Babbage’s ideas? The fancy way to say it is that his ideas had escaped the bounds of the adjacent possible. But it is perhaps better put in more prosaic terms: Babbage simply didn’t have the right spare parts. Even if Babbage had built a machine to his specs, it is unclear whether it would have worked, because Babbage was effectively sketching out a machine for the electronic age during the middle of the steam-powered mechanical revolution. Unlike all modern computers, Babbage’s machine was to be composed entirely of mechanical gears and switches, staggering in their number and in the intricacy of their design.

The trick is to figure out ways to explore the edges of possibility that surround you. This can be as simple as changing the physical environment you work in, or cultivating a specific kind of social network, or maintaining certain habits in the way you seek out and store information. Recall the question we began with: What kind of environment creates good ideas? The simplest way to answer it is this: innovative environments are better at helping their inhabitants explore the adjacent possible, because they expose a wide and diverse sample of spare parts—mechanical or conceptual—and they encourage novel ways of recombining those parts. Environments that block or limit those new combinations—by punishing experimentation, by obscuring certain branches of possibility, by making the current state so satisfying that no one bothers to explore the edges—will, on average, generate and circulate fewer innovations than environments that encourage exploration.

A good idea is a network. A specific constellation of neurons—thousands of them—fire in sync with each other for the first time in your brain, and an idea pops into your consciousness.

That abundance highlights the unique property of the carbon atom: its combinatorial power. Carbon is a connector. And so, when we look back to the original innovation engine on earth, we find two essential properties. First, a capacity to make new connections with as many other elements as possible. And, second, a “randomizing” environment that encourages collisions between all the elements in the system. All those spectacular polymer chains would remain unrealized, hidden behind the locked doors of the adjacent possible.

For reasons we will see, high-density liquid networks make it easier for innovation to happen, but they also serve the essential function of storing those innovations. Before writing, before books, before Wikipedia, the liquid network of cities preserved the accumulated wisdom of human culture. The pattern was repeated in the explosion of commercial and artistic innovation that emerged in the densely settled hill towns of Northern Italy, the birthplace of the European Renaissance. Michelangelo, Brunelleschi, and da Vinci were emerging from a medieval culture that suffered from too much order.

A better model might be MIT’s legendary Building 20, the temporary structure built during World War II that somehow managed to last fifty-five years, in part because it had an extraordinary track record for cultivating both breakthrough ideas and organizations like Noam Chomsky’s linguistics department, Bose Acoustics, and the Digital Equipment Corporation. As MIT wrote in a press release commemorating the building’s remarkable history: “Not assigned to any one school, department, or center, it seems to always have had space for the beginning project, the graduate student’s experiment, the interdisciplinary research center.” Because they are fixed physical structures, most offices have a natural tendency to disrupt liquid networks of information. They themselves are, quite literally, made out of solids, and they often map out the conceptual solid of a formal org chart, with its neatly defined departments and hierarchies. Building 20 resisted those calcifying forces for a simple reason: it was built on the cheap, which meant its residents had no qualms about tearing down a wall or punching a hole in the ceiling to adapt the space to a new idea. But architects and interior designers are learning how to build work environments that facilitate liquid networks in more permanent structures. Building 99 was created from the ground up to be reinvented by the unpredictable flow of collaboration and inspiration.

But standing in the atrium of Building 99, it’s impossible not to think that this space was designed to conjure up a different kind of flow: the collective flow of energized minds forming liquid networks in their mixing spaces and situation rooms. Building 99—like Building 20 before it—is a space that sees information spillover as a feature, not a flaw. It is designed to leak. In this, it shares some core values with the liquid networks of dense cities.

They have the seeds of something profound, but they lack a key element that can turn the hunch into something truly powerful. And more often than not, that missing element is somewhere else, living as another hunch in another person’s head. Liquid networks create an environment where those partial ideas can connect; they provide a kind of dating service for promising hunches. They make it easier to disseminate good ideas, of course, but they also do something more sublime: they help complete ideas.The real problem with Ken Williams’s hunch was not that it failed to envision the exact details or the imminence of the 9/11 plot, or even that his recommendations would have failed to prevent the plot had they been followed.

The Minnesota hunch has become intellectually fashionable in recent years: the gut instinct, the “emotional brain” flash assessment of a situation that defies the slower calculations of logic—but which nonetheless turns out to be uncannily accurate.

Darwin understands the importance of variation; the connection between natural and artificial selection; the competition among different species for survival; the clear physiological connections among species; the epic scale of evolutionary time. All these key concepts are discussed at great length in the notebooks from 1837 on. It is not merely that Darwin possesses the puzzle pieces but fails to put them together in the right configuration.

This is not a matter of gaps in the historical record. It is simply hard to pinpoint exactly when Darwin had the idea, because the idea didn’t arrive in a flash; it drifted into his consciousness over time, in waves. In the months before the Malthus reading, we could probably say that Darwin had the idea of natural selection in his head, but at the same time was incapable of fully thinking it. This is how slow hunches often mature: by stealth, in small steps. They fade into view.

Most slow hunches never last long enough to turn into something useful, because they pass in and out of our memory too quickly, precisely because they possess a certain murkiness. You get a feeling that there’s an interesting avenue to explore, a problem that might someday lead you to a solution, but then you get distracted by more pressing matters and the hunch disappears.

We can track the evolution of Darwin’s ideas with such precision because he adhered to a rigorous practice of maintaining notebooks where he quoted other sources, improvised new ideas, interrogated and dismissed false leads, drew diagrams, and generally let his mind roam on the page. We can see Darwin’s ideas evolve because on some basic level the notebook platform creates a cultivating space for his hunches; it is not that the notebook is a mere transcription of the ideas, which are happening offstage somewhere in Darwin’s mind. Darwin was constantly rereading his notes, discovering new implications. His ideas emerge as a kind of duet between the present-tense thinking brain and all those past observations recorded on paper. Somewhere in the middle of the Indian Ocean, a train of association compels him to revisit his notes on the fauna of the Galápagos archipelago from five months before. As he reads through his observations, a new thought begins to take shape in his mind, which provokes a whole new set of notes that will only make complete sense to Darwin two years later, after the Malthus episode.

whatever you may wish to do, to make, or to enjoy, provided your desire has relation to the necessities of domestic life, I shall be happy to assist you and therefore hope you will not fail to Enquire Within—Editor.For a while he struggled with the right name for his nascent platform, calling it an information “mine” or “mesh.” Eventually, he hit upon a different metaphor for the platform’s dense network. He called it the World Wide Web. In his own account of the Web’s origins, Tim Berners-Lee makes no attempt to collapse the evolution of his marvelous idea into a single epiphany. The Web came into being as an archetypal slow hunch: from a child’s exploration of a hundred-year-old encyclopedia, to a freelancer’s idle side project designed to help him keep track of his colleagues, to a deliberate attempt to build a new information platform that could connect computers across the planet. Like Darwin’s great understanding of life’s tangled web, Berners-Lee’s idea needed time—at least a decade’s worth—to mature.

His day job was “data acquisition and control”; building a global communications platform was his hobby. Because the two shared some attributes, his superiors at CERN allowed Berners-Lee to tinker with his side project over the years. Thanks to a handful of newsgroups on the Internet, Berners-Lee was able to supplement and refine his ideas by conversing with other early hypertext innovators. That combination of flexibility and connection gave Berners-Lee critical support for his idea. He needed a work environment that carved out a space for slow hunches, cordoned off from all the immediate dictates of the day’s agenda. And he needed information networks that let those hunches travel to other minds, where they could be augmented and polished.

Google famously instituted a “20-percent time” program for all Google engineers: for every four hours they spend working on official company projects, the engineers are required to spend one hour on their own pet project, guided entirely by their own passions and instincts. (Modeled on a similar program pioneered by 3M known as “the 15-percent rule,” Google’s system is officially called “Innovation Time Off.”) The only requirements are that they give semiregular updates on their progress to their superiors. Most engineers end up drifting from idea to idea, and the vast majority of those ideas never turn into an official Google product. But every now and then, one of those hunches blooms into something significant. AdSense, Google’s platform that allows bloggers and Web publishers to run Google ads on their sites, was partially generated during 20-percent time. In 2009, AdSense was responsible for more than $5 billion of Google’s earnings, nearly a third of their total for the year. Orkut, one of the largest social network sites in India and Brazil, originated in the Innovation Time Off of a Turkish Google engineer named Orkut Büyükkökten. Google’s popular mail platform, Gmail, has roots in an Innovation Time Off project as well. Marissa Mayer, Google’s vice president of Search Products and User Experience, claims that over 50 percent of Google’s new products derive from Innovation Time Off hunches.

Krishna Bharat, who now holds the title of “principal scientist” at Google. In the weeks after 9/11, Bharat found himself overwhelmed by the amount of news information available about the attacks and the imminent war in Afghanistan. It occurred to him that it would be useful to create a software tool that could organize all those stories into useful clusters of relevance, so that you could see at a glance all the latest stories from around the Web about the search for bin Laden, or the cleanup efforts at Ground Zero, or the Bush administration’s case for military retaliation. Bharat decided to use his 20-percent time to build a system called StoryRank—modeled after the original PageRank algorithm that Google’s search engine relies on—to organize and cluster news items. StoryRank eventually blossomed into Google News, one of the most popular (and controversial) sources of news and commentary on the Web.
