---
id: eaAX2fZBtVjgNVYxkGASG
title: 'Book Notes: Rokda'
desc: ''
updated: 1636922485828
created: 1636922485828
date: '2018-03-06'
categories:
  - research
---

- ‘Even the newspapers had splashed photos of one of our car wrecks on the front page,’ Gupta remembers. ‘The accident, the underworld threats, the terror of a missing family, and large scale financial losses—I was staring at, it was easily the worst day of my life, and I still shudder when I think of it.’ Ironically it is this day of adversity that also proved to be a turning point for Gupta in life, and particularly in business.
- Around Diwali that year, Neeraj’s new company was handing out little gifts to employees—those classic faux-leather boxes with a pen, a key chain and a wallet. That souvenir, he says, proved to be a trigger for his first serious, grown-up business venture and a chance to get out of a boring job.A friend of Neeraj’s sister, working at the time for Hindustan Unilever had come home one evening. Neeraj was lounging around, passing time after work, when he overheard the friend telling his sister about a product launch for which her boss had asked her to think of ideas for corporate gifting.‘I can’t think of anything appropriate for the occasion,’ she said. ‘Any ideas Neeraj?’He rushed in at once, opened his bag and handed over the present he’d had received at office. ‘I can supply as many of these as you want,’ he said, not thinking for a moment where from and how he was going to source the leather boxes.‘Ok. I will take this along and show it to my manager.’Surely the next day he got a call from the HUL head office asking him to come over for a meeting.‘How much would these cost?’ asked the manager. Neeraj stared at him blank as a wall, with not a clue as to how much he should quote.‘Rs 800,’ he said, taking a leap of faith.‘Will you be able to supply in bulk?’ asked the manager.‘Yes!’ said Neeraj, surprised at his own confidence about accomplishing a job about which he knew nothing.‘Okay, let’s do this,’ the manager said within a fraction of a second. ‘I will issue a P.O. (purchase order) for 500 pieces. What company do you represent?’‘Delta Exports,’ Neeraj blurted out, as if on cue. He is still not quite sure just how that name popped up in his head out of the blue, but sure as hell, at age 21, he had bagged his first big order of Rs 4 lakh, for a product he knew nothing about and in the name of a company that was but a figment of his wacky imagination. He was thrilled!The product was a hit and Delta Exports got repeat orders from HUL. Within a span of three months, the company had made a killing—a profit of Rs 3 lakh, a figure that was several times more than his salary at Tunicas.
- With a swagger in his stride and a sizable amount of money in the bank, he handed in his resignation, setting out to spend the next three years toying with no less than seven-eight different business ideas—from exporting embroidered garments to setting up a new company (ingeniously named Willow Paper Craft) manufacturing paper bags. Some worked, others didn’t, but the money he made selling leather gift cases to HUL sustained these experiments till he turned twenty four, giving him a chance to dabble in a number of small ventures. His only mantra was, no matter which business he got into, he would recover his investment, make a reasonable margin, and never lose money—a fundamental rule he adheres to, till date.
- With a lakh rupees in capital raised between the two of them, the duo got into business straight away. They bought tools and paid half the amount as deposit for a shed in Oshiwara—a neighborhood full of unauthorized automobile repair shops. The idea was to remain in the thick of all the action, differentiate in the middle of competition, rather than do business in an isolated part of town. In a trade where there was no discernible feature that one could consider to tell apart the hundreds of repairwallahs in the vicinity, Neeraj and Arun got thinking on how they could do things another way.
- The first thing they did to stand apart, was to set up a small cabin in the garage where they could entertain clients. Where customers next door were sweating it out and getting uncomfortable in a greasy, grimy shack, refusing to sit on the dirty plastic chairs strewn about for the fear of having their clothes soiled, Neeraj and Arun were enlightening clients about their ‘premium services’ over a cup of tea and biscuits.
- They came out with annual membership offers, loyalty cards, and scores of freebies bundled in with their service packages which included small things like six free car washes per annum, toeing services, oil change at no cost etc. They were small but significant value adds that helped them make a distinction and capture customers without charging too much more than their competitors. They also realized that for reliable service, the customer was willing to pay a small premium.
- The financial aspect could still be taken care of, but the thought of being a garagewallah all his life was bothering him somewhere at the back of his mind. What he really wanted to do at this point was associate firmly in some way or the other with a strong corporate brand and become an exclusive travel vendor rather than a mere service provider. This wasn’t difficult. Gupta’s personal relationships with Elite Class’s corporate clients were only going from strength to strength because of his affable, easy-going nature. And it was as a result of one of these associations that he formed Travel Link, now known as V-Link Travel Solutions, the holding company of Meru Cabs, the brand that he is famous for today. Back then, in its initial avatar, it was basically a company that owned one shuttle coach and employed two people—a cleaner and a driver to ferry BPO workers across the city.
- He used the very same principle that he had during the garage days—constant value-add. He introduced what were then considered unique concepts like safety training, driver identity cards, uniforms, car supervisors on site to ensure smooth operations, annual dinners for clients at five star hotels as relationship building exercises, and unmatched service delivery. With Farhat on flights three to four days a week, Gupta plunged himself entirely into work, dedicating 12-14 hours in personally supervising operations.
- The motto was to deliver on commitments by hook or by crook. So, sometimes when he was short of a car he’d borrow his parents or in-laws’ vehicle. Very often, if there were guests from abroad in need of an English speaking driver, he’d chauffeur them around in his own Maruti Esteem. ‘I had no qualms doing this. You have to be completely involved in your business and if need be, get your hands dirty as well. The day you start running it superficially it will suffer,’ Gupta says.
- The business model was straightforward—Gupta’s company would liaise with car suppliers, and play the role of an aggregator to ensure that service quality was maintained. The idea was to keep the business asset light and so only a few of the vehicles were to be owned by the company. He had as many as 1300 vehicles on the road, but by 2006, with business on a roll and vehicle ownership becoming a critical selling-point for vendors, Travel Link had to purchase and maintain hundred vehicles of its own. This would, as Gupta realized later, prove to be a burden rather than a blessing, as problems of parking, maintenance, drivers on the pay rolls, frequent accidents etc. would keep him awake all night.
- What helped it sustain the momentum and gather scale though was the dedication and risk taking capacity of the man who ran it. Neeraj never dithered from ploughing back the money he was making into his business.
- As luck would have it, London never happened, and within a few months of the shootout the threats faded out. Neeraj was convinced he wouldn’t pay a single penny of ransom and he stuck to that resolve. They eventually gave up. But the pressure was intense and it took a toll on him mentally. The intimidation had stopped, but his passion and zeal to grow his business also ebbed out swiftly. Those 24 hours between the 25 and 26 of July 2005—and the terrible year after that, till the shooting incident at office was the worst period of his life. But through this adversity, also came the big opportunity he was looking for all along. ‘I was provoked to disrupt the status quo. In due course, I got so fed up that I firmed up my decision to scout for an investor and sell out.’ That investor, which Gupta was seeking to cash out of Travel Link, would end up becoming a key force behind the Meru story.
- Around the time he was getting ready to fold, Travel Link, Neeraj hired Mind Spring, an investment advisory firm, to scout for a buyer. Through them he met Vikram Nirula. Vikram and Vishal Nevatia, former Arthur Anderson employees, had quit their jobs in 1999 to co-found GW Capital, the antecedent of IVFA or India Value Fund Advisors. IVFA, with investments in a dozen marquee names apart from Meru, was a firm that liked to do controlled transactions, whereby it could hold a majority stake, take the business to a certain scale, professionalize it and then exit in a five-seven year timeframe.
- ‘We used a more venture capital rather than PE approach,’” says Nirula, who with hindsight believes that the investment could have happened in 2010 rather than 2007, but cautions that sometimes you need to be ignorant about the market realities and throw caution to the winds if you are to make a success out of a very difficult, but exciting business. ‘If you know too much about a business, you will think only about the difficulties,’ he adds.
- Neeraj was in office going about his usual morning routine one day when a colleague excitedly barged into his cabin. ‘Look at this,’ he said, pointing to a newspaper advertisement. ‘The state government is coming out with a tender to give out licenses for new AC fleet taxis. Should we apply?’ ‘Put in a bid,’ said Neeraj disinterestedly, not enquiring about the nitty-gritty of the tender process, when it was decided that the company would throw in a proposal. He was still wallowing in dejection, with very little of his brain focused on what was happening in business.
- Travel Link had excellent relationships with its banks and an impressive balance sheet to boast of, so getting an initial loan sanctioned for a new company was not a problem. Seed capital was not a hurdle, as banks were more than willing to extend recourse financing.
- Vikram and Vishal shared Gupta’s vision and were quickly convinced about the fact that this license could potentially revolutionize a sector that was virtually free of competition. A big convincing point for Travel Link was also the fact that they already had operations of 500 to 600 vehicles in Mumbai for the staff transportation business. So, even if this venture was to fail, with passengers unwilling to pay a higher premium for radio taxis, the cars could be used during the night for the call centers, ensuring that losses, if any, could be minimized and no vehicle remained underutilized. Even in a worst case scenario of zero demand from retail consumers, business from Travel Link could still be used to cover costs and help pay off the EMIs.
- On 30 March 2007, ten months after Neeraj had reluctantly put in a bid, the Meru was finally launched with a media blitzkrieg. The who’s who of the city were present at the event with the then Chief Minister of Maharashtra, Vilas Rao Deshmukh, presiding over the function as the chief guest and veteran actor and danseuse Hema Malini performing for the occasion. The star-studded turnout ensured extensive media coverage with newspapers going gaga over Mumbai’s first ritzy, air-conditioned cab. The promise of mild mannered drivers displaying their ID cards on the dashboards and strict decrees like ‘I will not drink and drive’ ‘I will be well-groomed’, and ‘I will charge the customer as per the meter’ were a first of its kind, and the press lapped up the offering. The next morning, on day one, Meru’s call centre was flooded with enquiries and the phone didn’t stop ringing for the entire day. The company kicked off operations with barely 30 vehicles, but so enormous was the demand that the call centre was averaging about 500 calls per day. In the first week alone, booking requests were four or five times the capacity the company could make available. Neeraj and company realized very early on that the only way to survive and stay relevant was to expand rapidly and reduce order rejection volumes. Speed was the key.
- Neeraj, on the advice of a friend was only adamant about the fact that he didn’t want an obvious name for the brand, but a lateral more esoteric trademark.After several workshops and discussions it was decided that the cab would be called Meru—a mountain believed to be at the heart of the universe, the abode of Lord Brahma, and a pantheon of gods and goddesses. It was also according to ancient texts, the epicenter of the earth during the churning of the oceans (Sagar Manthan). It denoted sturdiness, reliability, and size—all vital dimensions of this business. A happy co-incidence was also that Me and Ru were the first two initials of Neeraj’s two daughters Mehak and Ruhi.
- The funding aspect, which ironically is the trickiest bit for any start up or entrepreneur was taken care of pretty quickly in the case of Gupta with IVF coming on board. So was the course of going through the bidding process where the company got extremely lucky as a result of little or no competition. The big speed bump that needed to be crossed was obtaining permits. The taxi license had come with a rider that the contractor will have to acquire permits from existing cab drivers. It is here that Gupta’s core strengths as a traditional, rooted entrepreneur—the understanding of local processes and procedures, and an ability to get things done by plotting a course through tough government bureaucracy, came to good use.
- Over the next two years, as the company expanded, they managed to get hold of as many as 2,000 permits. Nearly 1500 of those were obtained by asking the Government of Maharashtra to grant them the use of dead or lapsed permits—which are basically those that are not in use. This meant getting teams to sit across RTO offices in the city and making a list of the names and addresses of people who held these prized but dormant cards. Over months of hard work Gupta and his team built a database which revealed that there were as many as 15,000 permits not in use. Once again large teams were dispatched to each and every address in the file to try and persuade permit holders to part with their licenses. In no time, they managed to get hold of 1400-1500 permits. It was a unique and ingenious way of navigating a rather peculiar problem.
- With things getting progressively worse, Gupta decided to talk tough. Meru not only suspended the services of several drivers, but also launched aggressive press and social media campaigns through front page advertisements in major newspapers, appealing to Mumbaikars for help. ‘On social media, we managed to garner overwhelming support from customers, with more than 5000 people signing up to show their solidarity. Finally after 12 days of negotiations and losses of over a crore, the strike was called off,’ says Gupta, still perturbed by the memory.
- Meru’s business model was simple and straightforward. It paid the driver a subscription—Rs 900-Rs1300 a day—while owning and maintaining the fleet.
- While it admittedly took the company time to better align the driver-organization relationship—avoiding scenarios where the driver kept all the upside, with Meru assuming the risk, or where the company profiteered unreasonably while the driver remained a mere employee, Neeraj believes that for most part it was just a case of a few bad apples who had been politically instigated to resort to violence. He says a majority of the drivers were and continue to remain supportive of the management for the earning platform they’ve been provided with.
- Charters like the one submitted by unions in 2013 consisted of 21 explicit demands that were related to issues like subscription charges, other overheads to be paid by drivers, wrongful deduction of maintenance and repair charges, weekly offs etc. Press reports of the time and anonymous interactions with at least a dozen drivers revealed that most often decisions were unilaterally taken by top union leaders without support from majority of the drivers and any divergence in opinion from members was not tolerated. Drivers also said they are mostly happy with the company and earned anywhere between Rs 15000-Rs 20000 a month, which was at least 30 percent more than what they were making while driving the black and yellow taxis. But Meru was losing heavily. It was spending Rs 15,000 on repair and maintenance, Rs 15,000 on fixed administration costs, and 15,000 on EMIs per vehicle, while it earned only Rs 30,000 roughly from drivers. Yielding to demands for an ever sweeter deal for drivers was not possible. With losses swelling, the only option remaining was to tweak the business model with an intention to bring in operational efficiencies and reduce instances of agitation and strife. Attempting to side step the deep politicization of the sector became a key to survival, particularly in Mumbai where the days of heady growth were quickly nipped in the bud.
- One of those mistakes had been to not get out of the inventory led model quicker than they did. ‘Meru started by wanting to emulate the Singapore model in India, and we perhaps took very long to realize that this is a different market with its own idiosyncrasies. We simply could not function like they did in Singapore or anywhere else in the world,’ says Neeraj, mincing no words. The ‘Singapore model’ in essence was the inventory led model, where the asset is owned, managed, and maintained by the cab company. In Singapore, this system worked faultlessly as the quality of drivers was excellent, the fear of and support from government with regard to tackling strife was instant, contrary to the antagonistic attitude of politicians in India towards businesses. Instances of accidents were lower and expenses on regular maintenance and repair were lesser. Meru’s experience in India turned out to be quite the opposite. The company had by this time put in a large upfront investment in buying a massive fleet of 5,500 cars. Possessing these assets not only meant dealing with breakdowns, accidents, heavy expenditure on maintenance and repair but also zero lack of accountability from drivers who would often get vindictive and damage cars if certain demands of theirs were not met. ‘There were instances when drivers banged cars on an electricity pole on purpose because they were not sanctioned a holiday,’ remembers Gupta. And there were countless such incidents that the company had to put up with time and again. Starting straight away with an asset light strategy would not have helped either. The efficiencies of this model could have been experienced only once an excellent service platform was established. Without creating a solid brand and an ecosystem—which meant proving to the consumer a track record on reliability, service etc, they would not have flocked to a technology platform, particularly in 2007 when there was no such precedent in India. Anyhow, Meru’s state of crisis meant that at no point in time could Meru have more than 70-80 percent of its fleet on the road. Ten days in a month would be lost either because a driver has taken-off without intimation, the car was in the garage after having met with an accident, or employees were striking. Owning an asset had become expensive and a hindrance to the smooth functioning of day to day business. Calls had to be rejected because a large number of cars would always be out of service. The company slowly began fine-tuning its model in a bid to bring in greater efficiencies. There are three basic prototypes in the radio cabs business: Ownership: Where assets are owned, managed, and maintained by the company. Drivers are not full-time employees with fixed salaries, but operate the cabs and pay a certain commission per day to the company. Aggregation: An asset-light business model where the operator does not own the cars, but focuses on the technology and backend to link cabbies with consumers by providing an online booking platform. The driver owns and maintains the asset and only pays a commission to be registered with the operator and benefit from their brand and technology. Hybrid: A mix of ownership and aggregation where the asset is owned by the operator but maintained by the driver and eventually transferred in his/her name after a certain period. It was decided that Meru would gradually start phasing out the first model entirely. Turning drivers into full-time entrepreneurs was the need of the hour. Getting them to own the vehicle would ensure that the drivers had an incentive to maintain it and take ownership of their actions. The company encouraged drivers to do just that. Meru would facilitate bank loans at low rates and the driver would be responsible for paying the EMIs. Meru got a reduced subscription amount as its commission, but its overheads also came down substantially. By early 2014, in a bid to get asset light, the company had managed to also get rid of 1500 odd vehicles from its 5,500 fleet, selling some and transferring others into the names of drivers if the vehicle was four years old. This brought in efficiencies immediately. As the company shifted to this mixed—aggregation + hybrid—model, the focus was now on building a high-end IT platform making the business technology dependent, rather than asset reliant. This meant spending time on hardcore analytics, checking on consumer trends and patterns to predict the future requirements, devising offerings like a mobile App with an Insta-Pay option, card payment facilities, automated e-bills, trip tracker services for women safety etc.
- ‘While offline we had spent months trying to build the perfect offering, this time our approach had changed diametrically. We decided to just dive in and tackle problems as and when they arose, and it worked,’ explains Rohit. Core to this philosophy was paying close attention to insights and criticism gathered from merchants and consumers so as to tap the idiosyncrasies of the market and offer a service that was most relevant to local conditions.
- A customer told them he was unsure about whether the company was legitimate. So promptly a landline number was put right at the top of the site. Another complained that he wasn’t getting a confirmation voucher after making a payment, so they introduced that element too. A few months down the line buyers protested about the fact that they couldn’t avail the offer of the day even if they wanted to because the location was too far out.
- Unlike cities in the US, which were smaller and had one downtown area, Indian cities tended to be large and spread out, so replicating the American model of having just one deal per city wasn’t working. It made sense to introduce a function whereby people could input their location and get a deal around their area. Such teething issues that one couldn’t have predicted before consumers actually used the service came to the fore, and Snapdeal moved with speed to fix the loopholes.
- This breakneck speed and ability to act on consumer feedback is what helped the company, considered by several in the industry as among the most nimble in India, grow into the behemoth it is today. Both Rohit and Kunal believe in an action-oriented approach, and do not like sitting over endless debates. Jump and make it happen has been their mantra which is reflected in the rapid evolution of Snapdeal from a company that sold discount coupons, to one that transitioned to online deals and now into India’s largest broad focus e-commerce marketplace in just four years. They played around with the business model until they got it right
- Long-term focus on small vendors and non-metro consumers will also hold the company in good stead believes Rohit. Like Alibaba, which has over 50 percent of its sellers coming from tier-3 and tier-4 cities, Snapdeal also has a third of its vendors outside Metros and nearly two-thirds of its customers in tier-2 and below cities. ‘The urban elite is a small sliver of the market. If e-commerce has to grow to the next stage, it needs to become relevant for everyone. It needs to participate in people’s daily lives, where they start making core purchases online, not merely fancy bazooka items. Which is why our language is very different, our branding is more inclusive than our competitors,’ he insists.
