---
title: "Steve Jobs: Details"
date: "2018-08-18"
categories: 
  - "research"
---

I remember Steve walking in and sitting down. He seemed shaken by the World Trade Center attacks and made a few comments as we waited for others to arrive and then announced: “But we can’t afford to be distracted. The show must go on. Let’s proceed.” So we started presenting our case, talking through the dozens of slides that we’d put together covering every topic from competitive pressures to product-market fit to revenue projections to engineering team integration and more. I did a large part of the presentation as it was ultimately my team that would host the arriving R&D team. I noticed, as I was speaking, that Steve started flipping through the printed copy of the slides in front of him. He was listening to the pitch and simultaneously flipping through the spreadsheets that presented the target company’s sales forecasts, costs, profits, etc. Half a dozen pages in, he slowed down and started running his finger down the page. Then he looked up, waited for a pause in the presentation, and said in a soft voice: “This number is wrong!” You could hear a pin drop in the room. I was floored and lost my entire train of thought in that instant. He had just scanned dozens of pages worth of numbers, data that an entire team of thirty or more people had worked on for over a month, and instantly pinpointed a flaw in the math. I knew he was a math whiz but never saw this coming. Later, I heard from others that he had a habit of doing this. I admit, in hindsight, to not having paid great attention to every single number on every single page of the spreadsheet. I was more interested in the strategic synergy, the competitive pressure, the customer value prop, the engineering team integration, and a dozen other angles. I’d trusted the finance guys to get the math right. In my zeal, I’d wanted the deal to happen, so I’d been happy with the nice numbers and didn’t question them enough. We spent the next few minutes scratching our heads, mumbling, and re-working the math in real-time. He was right! There was a serious flaw in one of our formulas and no one else had noticed it. The deal didn’t make any sense once you corrected the math. We were done. The fact that he noticed the error while simultaneously listening to my pitch, not to mention the distractions caused by the day’s ghastly news, gave me pause. Any other executive would have assumed his finance people could write Excel formulas and delegated the task. But not Steve. That level of attention to detail was impressive, to say the least. The lesson I learned from Steve that day was simple: Every single detail matters. Trust but verify. One of my favorite quotes is from the author Sam Harris: “Boredom is just lack of attention.” But I prefer to turn the phrase around into a positive statement that best summarizes the lesson I learned from Bill: If you pay enough attention, everything is interesting.

Case in point: I was the brash young engineer who quit from NeXT Computer in 1992 when Steve Jobs cancelled the project I was working on: a PowerPC based next generation dual processor workstation running NeXTStep. The project was almost finished, the system was ready to be shipped, and was due to be announced at an industry conference the following week when it was cancelled. I was so mad that I didn’t even bother including the job experience on my resume! Steve tried to get me to stay at the company but I was too hot headed and angry to realize that he had made the right call. He had realized that the battle over processor architectures was over and Intel had won. He completely killed all hardware projects at NeXT and gave the company a software-only focus. I, of course, stormed out the door. How dare he cancel my project? I was too busy looking at the trees in front of me to see the forest all around. The processor war was over. The correct answer was to move up the stack and innovate in software, not to keep fighting the processor war for an ever-shrinking slice of the market. Of course, he then returned to Apple with the NeXT team intact and the rest is history. That’s what I mean when I say the hardest lessons take years to internalize. I wasn’t thinking at that level. I was too emotional about the project I’d just spent so much time and effort on. I couldn’t be bothered to take a step back and look at the bigger picture. What I learned from Steve later — much later, after I had cooled down — was to fight the right battles. Continuing to fight a battle after the war has already been lost is an exercise in futility.
