---
title: "Lessons: IPCC-2 May'18"
date: "2018-05-02"
categories: 
  - "research"
---

Planning

Execution

Sticking to plan-strategy

No feedback analysis

Time Wastage

Prevalence of Dominant interest over prioritised activities(ML over IPCC Preparation)

No socializing with like minded people(IPCC Students)

No Networking with experienced people(Gaurav Khandelwal) earlier.

No touch with people for advice, gone through these stages(Charu Gupta)

Smartwork- Strategising not done( Gaurav Khandelwal said you should have strategised this 6mths before and not 10 days prior to exams, as well as should have consulted "industry people" whether to give both groups and clear in one attempt or pass one by one)

No laser focus, didn't buy books, didn't look for reference books till end moment. Simply relied on easy coaching, which too wasn't done diligently.

Didn't have a routine-schedule to follow.

Sleep schedule messed, wake up early.

Dhoni like strategising, Kohli like hardwork. Kohli or Dhoni don't win on the day of match rather on days before when they refused to sleep back or refuse to rest or get accustomed to comfort or leisure. Its like the iceberg, top is what we see but the bottom part(strategy,planning, practice, execution) is where everything lies.

Longterm goal alignment with what you have right now, look at bigger picture(Even if not able to get into Big four don't take it on your pride) think about what "can" be done for growing towards longterm goal(MBA or CA Rank, etc).

Daily goal review(Longterm-Midterm-Shortterm)
