---
id: FipkOlQvL1CPgMDcyZbk8
title: 'Book Notes: Tools of Titans - Timothy Ferriss'
desc: ''
updated: 1636922485844
created: 1636922485844
date: '2018-03-06'
categories:
  - research
---

- "Sauna for endurance: Amelia has found using a sauna improves her endurance, a concept that has since been confirmed by several other athletes, including cyclist David Zabriskie, seven-time U.S. National Time Trial Championship winner. He considers sauna training a more practical replacement for high-altitude simulation tents. In the 2005 Tour de France, Dave won the Stage 1 time trial, making him the first American to win stages in all three Grand Tours. Zabriskie beat Lance Armstrong by seconds, clocking an average speed of 54.676 kilometers per hour (!). I now use a sauna at least four times per week. To figure out the best protocols, I asked another podcast guest, Rhonda Patrick." (Note: David Zaprieski) (Chapter:Amelia Boone)
- "“When I let go of what I am, I become what I might be.” —Lao Tzu" (Chapter:PART 1: HEALTHY)
- "I’m not the strongest. I’m not the fastest. But I’m really good at suffering." (Chapter:PART 1: HEALTHY)
- "The next day, I felt like I’d been put in a sleeping bag and swung against a tree for a few hours." (Chapter:Amelia Boone)
- "masochist" (Chapter:Amelia Boone)
- "Unbeknownst" (Chapter:Amelia Boone)
- "How important is failure in business? “I think failure is massively overrated. Most businesses fail for more than one reason. So when a business fails, you often don’t learn anything at all because the failure was overdetermined. \[TF: Overdetermined: “To determine, account for, or cause (something) in more than one way or with more conditions than are necessary.”\] You will think it failed for Reason 1, but it failed for Reasons 1 through 5. And so the next business you start will fail for Reason 2, and then for 3 and so on. “I think people actually do not learn very much from failure. I think it ends up being quite damaging and demoralizing to people in the long run, and my sense is that the death of every business is a tragedy." (Chapter:Peter Thiel)
- "What one thing would you most like to change about yourself or improve on? “It’s always hard to answer this, since it sort of begs the question of why I haven’t already improved on it. But I would say that when I look back on my younger self, I was insanely tracked, insanely competitive. And when you’re very competitive, you get good at the thing you’re competing with people on. But it comes at the expense of losing out on many other things. “If you’re a competitive chess player, you might get very good at chess but neglect to develop other things because you’re focused on beating your competitors, rather than on doing something that’s important or valuable. So I’ve become, I think, much more self-aware over the years about the problematic nature of a lot of the competition. There have been rivalries that we get caught up in. And I would not pretend to have extricated myself from this altogether. So I think, every day, it’s something to reflect on and think about ‘How do I become less competitive in order that I can become more successful?’ ”" (Chapter:Peter Thiel)
- "What do people agree merely by convention, and what is the truth?’ There’s a consensus of things that people believe to be true. Maybe the conventions are right, and maybe they’re not. And we never want to let a convention be a shortcut for truth. We always need to ask: Is this true? And this is always what I get at with this indirect question: ‘Tell me something that’s true that very few people agree with you on.’ ”" (Chapter:Peter Thiel)
- "palpable" (Chapter:BJ Miller)
- "camaraderie" (Chapter:BJ Miller)
- "on Craigslist “Do not email a response, call \[a phone number\] and leave a voicemail with A, B, and C.” Anyone who responds via email is disqualified. Don’t succumb to replying to everyone out of guilt. From Maria: “Guilt \[is\] interesting because guilt is the flip side of prestige, and they’re both horrible reasons to do things.”  " (Chapter:Maria Popova)
- "“This should be a cardinal rule of the Internet (and of being human): If you don’t have the patience to read something, don’t have the hubris to comment on it.”  " (Chapter:Maria Popova)
- "hubris" (Chapter:Maria Popova)
- “If you set your goals ridiculously high and it’s a failure, you will fail above everyone else’s success.” —James Cameron

 

- Marc Andreessen “Strong Views, Loosely Held” For a long time, this phrase was in Marc’s Twitter bio. I asked him to explain the meaning: “Most people go through life and never develop strong views on things, or specifically go along and buy into the consensus. One of the things I think you want to look for as both a founder and as an investor is things that are out of consensus, something very much opposed to the conventional wisdom. . . . Then, if you’re going to start a company around that, if you’re going to invest in that, you better have strong conviction because you’re making a very big bet of time or money or both. \[But\] what happens when the world changes? What happens when something else happens?”
- TF: That’s where “loosely held” comes in. People everywhere hate changing their minds, but you need to be able to adapt in light of new information. Many of my friends in this book will fight you tooth and nail over a topic, perhaps making dinner company nervously glance around, but as soon as you cite better information or a better logic, they’ll concede and say something like, “You’re totally right. I never thought about that.”
- “To do original work: It’s not necessary to know something nobody else knows. It is necessary to believe something few other people believe.”
- Arnold Schwarzeneger This reminded me of the deal that George Lucas crafted for Star Wars, in which the studio effectively said, “Toys? Yeah, sure, whatever. You can have the toys.” That was a multi-billion-dollar mistake that gave Lucas infinite financing for life (an estimated 8,000,000,000+ units sold to date). When deal-making, ask yourself: Can I trade a short-term, incremental gain for a potential longer-term, game-changing upside? Is there an element here that might be far more valuable in 5 to 10 years (e.g., ebook rights 10 years ago)? Might there be rights or options I can explicitly “carve out” and keep? If you can cap the downside (time, capital, etc.) and have the confidence, take uncrowded bets on yourself. You only need one winning lottery ticket.
- I felt if I was smart with real estate and took my little money that I made in bodybuilding and in seminars and selling my courses through the mail, I could save up enough to put down money for an apartment building. I realized in the 1970s that the inflation rate was very high and therefore an investment like that is unbeatable. Buildings that I would buy for $500K within the year were $800K and I put only maybe $100K down, so you made 300% on your money. . . . I quickly developed and traded up my buildings and bought more apartment buildings and office buildings on Main Street down in Santa Monica and so on. . . . I benefited from \[a magic decade\] and I became a millionaire from my real estate investments. That was before my career took off in show business and acting, which was after Conan the Barbarian.”
- TF: This makes me think of one of my favorite negotiating maxims: “In negotiation, he who cares the least wins.” He could ignore bit parts because he had cash flow from his real estate investments. On a related note, Arnold makes films or stars in them, but he doesn’t invest in them. He’s offset the potential volatility of his own career by investing primarily in real estate. I’ve taken a similar approach to date, focusing on two ends of the spectrum: early-stage tech startups (extremely volatile) and real estate that I’m happy to hold forever, if need be.
- Derek Sivers “If \[more\] information was the answer, then we’d all be billionaires with perfect abs.” TF: It’s not what you know, it’s what you do consistently.
