---
id: SqUeHdwMDbzmRgVPqEKZ6
title: 'Book Notes: The Polyester Prince'
desc: ''
updated: 1636922485913
created: 1636922485913
date: '2020-12-17'
categories:
  - research
---

Dhirubhai’s coup was to persuade Pai in 1971 to authorise imports of polyester fila-ment yarn (PFY) against exports of nylon fabric. Previously, nylon fabric exporters had earned some rights to replenish their stocks of nylon fibres through imports. Dhirubhai argued that if he could sell nylon or other manufac- tured textiles (known as ‘art silks’) at Rs 4.25 a yard, more than double the price stipulated in the old scheme, the exporter should be rewarded by permission to import PFY, which was in greater domestic short-age because local production was far below demand.This resulted in what was called the Higher Unit Value Scheme, which made Dhirubhai a fortune while it lasted. At that time, the domestic price of PFY was seven or more times higher than the prevailing international price. Even if the nylon or polyester exports fetched only a quarter or one third of cost, this was more than offset by the 600 per cent or more profit on the PFY imports.Reliance went into a high-profile export drive, targeting some of the weaker economies of the world. Poland was one focus, with fashion shows mounted in Warsaw and del-egations of Polish trade officials lavishly hosted by Dhirubhai in Bombay. Another was Saudi Arabia, where Dhirubhai had another old Aden colleague from Besse & Co’s Halal Shipping division, Bharat Kumar Shah, then working as a trader in Jeddah and acting as Reliance’s Mid-East ‘co-ordination manager’. Dhirubbai would take out full-page ad-vertisements in The Times of India to announce special charter flights taking his export products to foreign markets.But many senior figures in the textile industry still believe this export business was mostly bogus. ‘If these goods were not saleable at two rupees, how could they sell at four rupees?’, one remarked. According to this theory, Dhirubhai would have pro- vided his own export earnings, by sending the money out to the ostensible buyer overseas through the illegal foreign exchange channels known as havala (accepting the 20 per cent havala premium on the official exchange rate). The goods would be sent to a free port such as Singapore or Dubai, to avoid customs duty, and then he disposed of at giveaway prices, left to rot on the docks, or even dumped at sea. The effective outgo-ings would be the 20 per cent havala premium on the funds sent out, and the 60 per cent of the same funds actually spent on buying PFY overseas for import back into In-dia. The returns would be this 60 per cent multiplied by seven or more. The profit would be 425 per cent of the outlay. And as long as Dhirubhai had the ‘export remittance’ ar-riving back in his account in Bombay, he could claim credit for doing his bit for India’s trade balance. In an interview with the magazine Business lndia in April 1980, Dhirubhai said Reliance Commercial Corp accounted for more than 60 per cent of the exports made under the Higher Unit Value Scheme. ‘The schemes were open to everyone,’ he said. ‘I cannot be blamed if my competitors were unenterprising or ignorant.’

Sen Gupta denies that he was unduly permissive to Reliance, or that he ever received any benefits from Dhirubhai such as share allotments. ‘On my first encounter with him I had to say no,’ Sen Gupta recalled. With the third series of debentures, Dhirubhai had put in a request that the holders be entitled to renounce rights attached to their im-plicit share entitlements. Sen Gupta insisted that the debentures were not shares until converted.But Reliance was highly persuasive. On another occasion, Sen Gupta rejected the pre-mium that Reliance was seeking to put on an issue, on the ground that projected profit-ability had not been indicated. Without a pro-forma balance sheet for the current year-an extension of results to date-it could not be accepted.It was 1 pm that day; Sen Gupta was due to fly that evening to Bombay for a meeting of his seven-member committee on capital issues the next morning. Obviously it would be impossible to have the paperwork ready for this meeting. He told Reliance.Coming out of the arrivals hall of Bombay Airport at 7 prn, Sen Gupta was met by ac-countants from Reliance, and handed a copy of the pro-forma balance sheet and results for each of the seven committee members. ‘I had no option but to take up the matter at our meeting,’ Sen Gupta said.

‘The most important external environment is the Govern- ment of India,’ he told India Today’s T N. Ninan and Jagannath Dubashi. ‘You have to sell your ideas to the government. Selling the idea is the most important thing, and for that I’d meet anybody in the government. I am willing to salaam anyone. One thing you won’t find in me and that is ego.’

‘The dis- tinction between Reliance and others is that it creates the future for itself rather than waste time on sobbing over government controls and insen-sitivity of government policies.’ It was a frequently made observation.

By being able to quickly transform debt into equity, Dhirubhai seemed to have avoided the borrowing trap that eventually caught up with so many other stars of the global sharernarket boom in the 1980s. By expanding only into associated products, he cre-ated enormous internal economies for Reliance.
