---
id: zfdFM4M5aE48t9TgYuuuk
title: 'Book Notes: How To Win Friends And Influence People - Carnegie, Dale'
desc: ''
updated: 1636922485820
created: 1636922485820
date: '2018-03-06'
categories:
  - research
---

- "In the long run, flattery will do you more harm than good. " (Chapter:2 The Big Secret of Dealing with People)
- "The difference between appreciation and flattery? That is simple. One is sincere and the other insincere. One comes from the heart out; the other from the teeth out. One is unselfish; the other selfish. One is universally admired; the other universally condemned." (Chapter:2 The Big Secret of Dealing with People)
- "Remember that tomorrow when you are trying to get somebody to do something. If, for example, you don’t want your children to smoke, don’t preach at them, and don’t talk about what you want; but show them that cigarettes may keep them from making the basketball team or winning the hundred-yard dash." (Chapter:3 ‘He Who Can Do This Has the Whole World with Him. He Who Cannot Walks a Lonely Way’)
- "First, arouse in the other person an eager want. He who can do this has the whole world with him. He who cannot walks a lonely way.’" (Chapter:3 ‘He Who Can Do This Has the Whole World with Him. He Who Cannot Walks a Lonely Way’)
- "Then I took a letterhead and ran a line through the centre and headed one column ‘Advantages’ and the other column ‘Disadvantages.’ I wrote down under the head ‘Advantages’ these words: ‘Ballroom free.’ Then I went on to say: ‘You will have the advantage of having the ballroom free to rent for dances and conventions. That is a big advantage, for affairs like that will pay you much more than you can get for a series of lectures. If I tie your ballroom up for twenty nights during the course of the season, it is sure to mean a loss of some very profitable business to you. ‘Now, let’s consider the disadvantages. First, instead of increasing your income from me, you are going to decrease it. In fact, you are going to wipe it out because I cannot pay the rent you are asking. I shall be forced to hold these lectures at some other place. ‘There’s another disadvantage to you also. These lectures attract crowds of educated and cultured people to your hotel. That is good advertising for you, isn’t it? In fact, if you spent five thousand dollars advertising in the newspapers, you couldn’t bring as many people to look at your hotel as I can bring by these lectures. That is worth a lot to a hotel, isn’t it?’ As I talked, I wrote these two ‘disadvantages’ under the proper heading, and handed the sheet of paper to the manager, saying: ‘I wish you would carefully consider both the advantages and disadvantages that are going to accrue to you and then give me your final decision.’ I received a letter the next day, informing me that my rent would be increased only 50 percent instead of 300 percent." (Chapter:3 ‘He Who Can Do This Has the Whole World with Him. He Who Cannot Walks a Lonely Way’)
- "People who can put themselves in the place of other people, who can understand the workings of their minds, need never worry about what the future has in store for them.’" (Chapter:3 ‘He Who Can Do This Has the Whole World with Him. He Who Cannot Walks a Lonely Way’)
- "First, arouse in the other person an eager want. He who can do this has the whole world with him. He who cannot walks a lonely way." (Chapter:3 ‘He Who Can Do This Has the Whole World with Him. He Who Cannot Walks a Lonely Way’)
- "IN A NUTSHELL FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES IN HANDLING PEOPLE PRINCIPLE 1 Don’t criticise, condemn or complain. PRINCIPLE 2 Give honest and sincere appreciation. PRINCIPLE 3 Arouse in the other person an eager want." (Chapter:3 ‘He Who Can Do This Has the Whole World with Him. He Who Cannot Walks a Lonely Way’)
- "You knew by some divine instinct that you can make more friends in two months by becoming genuinely interested in other people than you can in two years by trying to get other people interested in you. " (Chapter:1 Do This and You’ll Be Welcome Anywhere)
- "It is the individual who is not interested in his fellow men who has the greatest difficulties in life and provides the greatest injury to others. It is from among such individuals that all human failures spring.’" (Chapter:1 Do This and You’ll Be Welcome Anywhere)
- "Action seems to follow feeling, but really action and feeling go together; and by regulating the action, which is under the more direct control of the will, we can indirectly regulate the feeling, which is not." (Chapter:2 A Simple Way to Make a Good First Impression)
- "There is nothing either good or bad,’ said Shakespeare, ‘but thinking makes it so.’" (Chapter:2 A Simple Way to Make a Good First Impression)
- "A man without a smiling face must not open a shop." (Chapter:2 A Simple Way to Make a Good First Impression)
- "Finally he asked, ‘What would you call the new company?’ and Carnegie replied promptly: ‘Why, the Pullman Palace Car Company, of course.’ Pullman’s face brightened. ‘Come into my room,’ he said. ‘Let’s talk it over.’ That talk made industrial history." (Chapter:3 If You Don’t Do This, You Are Headed for Trouble)
- "He was proud of the fact that he could call many of his factory workers by their first names, and he boasted that while he was personally in charge, no strike ever disturbed his flaming steel mills." (Chapter:3 If You Don’t Do This, You Are Headed for Trouble)
- "All this takes time, but ‘Good manners,’ said Emerson, ‘are made up of petty sacrifices.’" (Chapter:3 If You Don’t Do This, You Are Headed for Trouble)
- "That kept her talking for forty-five minutes. She never again asked me where I had been or what I had seen. She didn’t want to hear me talk about my travels. All she wanted was an interested listener, so she could expand her ego and tell about where she had been." (Chapter:4 An Easy Way to Become a Good Conversationalist)
- "Doubtless Mr. – had considered himself a holy crusader, defending the public rights against callous exploitation. But in reality, what he had really wanted was a feeling of importance. He got this feeling of importance at first by kicking and complaining. But as soon as he got his feeling of importance from a representative of the company, his imagined grievances vanished into thin air." (Chapter:4 An Easy Way to Become a Good Conversationalist)
- "‘Many persons call a doctor when all they want is an audience.’" (Chapter:4 An Easy Way to Become a Good Conversationalist)
- "A person’s toothache means more to that person than a famine in China which kills a million people. " (Chapter:4 An Easy Way to Become a Good Conversationalist)
- "For Roosevelt knew, as all leaders know, that the royal road to a person’s heart is to talk about the things he or she treasures most." (Chapter:5 How to Interest People)
- "I discovered he belonged to a society of hotel executives called the Hotel Greeters of America. He not only belonged, but his bubbling enthusiasm had made him president of the organisation, and the president of the International Greeters. No matter where its conventions were held, he would be there. ‘So when I saw him the next day, I began talking about the Greeters. What a response I got. What a response! He talked to me for half an hour about the Greeters, his tones vibrant with enthusiasm. I could plainly see that this society was not only his hobby, it was the passion of his life. Before I left his office, he had “sold” me a membership in his organisation. ‘In the meantime, I had said nothing about bread. But a few days later, the steward of his hotel phoned me to come over with samples and prices. ‘ “I don’t know what you did to the old boy,” the steward greeted me, “but he sure is sold on you!”" (Chapter:5 How to Interest People)
- "I noticed that the clerk appeared to be bored with the job – weighing envelopes, handing out stamps, making change, issuing receipts – the same monotonous grind year after year. So I said to myself: ‘I am going to try to make that clerk like me. Obviously to make him like me, I must say something nice, not about myself, but about him. So I asked myself, “What is there about him that I can honestly admire?”" (Chapter:6 How to Make People Like You Instantly)
- "There is one all-important law of human conduct. If we obey that law, we shall almost never get into trouble. In fact, that law, if obeyed, will bring us countless friends and constant happiness. But the very instant we break the law, we shall get into endless trouble. The law is this: Always make the other person feel important." (Chapter:6 How to Make People Like You Instantly)
- "John Dewey, as we have already noted, said that the desire to be important is the deepest urge in human nature; and William James said: ‘The deepest principle in human nature is the craving to be appreciated.’ " (Chapter:6 How to Make People Like You Instantly)
- "‘hearty in their approbation and lavish in their praise.’ " (Chapter:6 How to Make People Like You Instantly)
- "Little phrases such as ‘I’m sorry to trouble you,’ ‘Would you be so kind as to – ?’ ‘Won’t you please?’ ‘Would you mind?’ ‘Thank you’ – little courtesies like these oil the cogs of the monotonous grind of everyday life – and incidentally, they are the hallmark of good breeding." (Chapter:6 How to Make People Like You Instantly)
- "The unvarnished truth is that almost all the people you meet feel themselves superior to you in some way, and a sure way to their hearts is to let them realise in some subtle way that you realise their importance, and recognise it sincerely." (Chapter:6 How to Make People Like You Instantly)
- "‘Talk to people about themselves,’ said Disraeli, one of the shrewdest men who ever ruled the British Empire. ‘Talk to people about themselves and they will listen for hours.’" (Chapter:6 How to Make People Like You Instantly)
- "IN A NUTSHELL SIX WAYS TO MAKE PEOPLE LIKE YOU PRINCIPLE 1 Become genuinely interested in other people. PRINCIPLE 2 Smile. PRINCIPLE 3 Remember that a person’s name is to that person the sweetest and most important sound in any language. PRINCIPLE 4 Be a good listener. Encourage others to talk about themselves. PRINCIPLE 5 Talk in terms of the other person’s interests. PRINCIPLE 6 Make the other person feel important – and do it sincerely." (Chapter:6 How to Make People Like You Instantly)
- "On our way home that night, I said to Mr. Gammond: ‘Frank, you knew that quotation was from Shakespeare.’ ‘Yes, of course,’ he replied, ‘Hamlet, Act Five, Scene Two. But we were guests at a festive occasion, my dear Dale. Why prove to a man he is wrong? Is that going to make him like you? Why not let him save his face? He didn’t ask for your opinion. He didn’t want it. Why argue with him? Always avoid the acute angle.’ " (Chapter:1 You Can’t Win an Argument)
- "When I went to college, I studied logic and argumentation and went in for debating contests. Talk about being from Missouri, I was born there. I had to be shown. Later, I taught debating and argumentation in New York; and once, I am ashamed to admit, I planned to write a book on the subject. Since then, I have listened to, engaged in, and watched the effect of thousands of arguments. As a result of all this, I have come to the conclusion that there is only one way under high heaven to get the best of an argument – and that is to avoid it. Avoid it as you would avoid rattlesnakes and earthquakes." (Chapter:1 You Can’t Win an Argument)
- "Nine times out of ten, an argument ends with each of the contestants more firmly convinced than ever that he is absolutely right." (Chapter:1 You Can’t Win an Argument)
- "A man convinced against his will Is of the same opinion still." (Chapter:1 You Can’t Win an Argument)
- "Mr. O’Haire became one of the star salesmen for the White Motor Company in New York. How did he do it? Here is his story in his own words: ‘If I walk into a buyer’s office now and he says: “What? A White truck? They’re no good! I wouldn’t take one if you gave it to me. I’m going to buy the Whose-It truck,” I say, “The Whose-It is a good truck. If you buy the Whose-It, you’ll never make a mistake. The Whose-Its are made by a fine company and sold by good people.” ‘He is speechless then. There is no room for an argument. If he says the Whose-It is best and I say sure it is, he has to stop. He can’t keep on all afternoon saying, “It’s the best” when I’m agreeing with him. We then get off the subject of Whose-It and I begin to talk about the good points of the White truck." (Chapter:1 You Can’t Win an Argument)
- "Buddha said: ‘Hatred is never ended by hatred but by love,’ and a misunderstanding is never ended by an argument but by tact, diplomacy, conciliation and a sympathetic desire to see the other person’s viewpoint." (Chapter:1 You Can’t Win an Argument)
- "Better give your path to a dog than be bitten by him in contesting for the right. Even killing the dog would not cure the bite.’" (Chapter:1 You Can’t Win an Argument)
- "In an article in Bits and Pieces,1 some suggestions are made on how to keep a disagreement from becoming an argument: Welcome the disagreement. Remember the slogan, ‘When two partners always agree, one of them is not necessary.’ If there is some point you haven’t thought about, be thankful if it is brought to your attention. Perhaps this disagreement is your opportunity to be corrected before you make a serious mistake. Distrust your first instinctive impression. Our first natural reaction in a disagreeable situation is to be defensive. Be careful. Keep calm and watch out for your first reaction. It may be you at your worst, not your best. Control your temper. Remember, you can measure the size of a person by what makes him or her angry. Listen first. Give your opponents a chance to talk. Let them finish. Do not resist, defend or debate. This only raises barriers. Try to build bridges of understanding. Don’t build higher barriers of misunderstanding. Look for areas of agreement. When you have heard your opponents out, dwell first on the points and areas on which you agree. Be honest. Look for areas where you can admit error and say so. Apologize for your mistakes. It will help disarm your opponents and reduce defensiveness. Promise to think over your opponents’ ideas and study them carefully. And mean it. Your opponents may be right. It is a lot easier at this stage to agree to think about their points than to move rapidly ahead and find yourself in a position where your opponents can say: ‘We tried to tell you, but you wouldn’t listen.’ Thank your opponents sincerely for their interest. Anyone who takes the time to disagree with you is interested in the same things you are. Think of them as people who really want to help you, and you may turn your opponents into friends. Postpone action to give both sides time to think through the problem. Suggest that a new meeting be held later that day or the next day, when all the facts may be brought to bear. In preparation for this meeting, ask yourself some hard questions: Could my opponents be right? Partly right? Is there truth or merit in their position or argument? Is my reaction one that will relieve the problem, or will it just relieve any frustration? Will my reaction drive my opponents further away or draw them closer to me? Will my reaction elevate the estimation good people have of me? Will I win or lose? What price will I have to pay if I win? If I am quiet about it, will the disagreement blow over? Is this difficult situation an opportunity for me?" (Chapter:1 You Can’t Win an Argument)
- "‘When two partners always agree, one of them is not necessary.’" (Chapter:1 You Can’t Win an Argument)
- "Men must be taught as if you taught them not And things unknown proposed as things forgot." (Chapter:2 A Sure Way of Making Enemies – and How to Avoid It)
- "You cannot teach a man anything; you can only help him to find it within himself." (Chapter:2 A Sure Way of Making Enemies – and How to Avoid It)
- "Be wiser than other people if you can; but do not tell them so." (Chapter:2 A Sure Way of Making Enemies – and How to Avoid It)
- "One thing only I know, and that is that I know nothing." (Chapter:2 A Sure Way of Making Enemies – and How to Avoid It)
- "‘Well, now, look. I thought otherwise but I may be wrong. I frequently am. And if I am wrong, I want to be put right. Let’s examine the facts.’" (Chapter:2 A Sure Way of Making Enemies – and How to Avoid It)
- "We sometimes find ourselves changing our minds without any resistance or heavy emotion, but if we are told we are wrong, we resent the imputation and harden our hearts. We are incredibly heedless in the formation of our beliefs, but find ourselves filled with an illicit passion for them when anyone proposes to rob us of their companionship. It is obviously not the ideas themselves that are dear to us, but our self-esteem which is threatened . . . The little word ‘my’ is the most important one in human affairs, and properly to reckon with it is the beginning of wisdom. It has the same force whether it is ‘my’ dinner, ‘my’ dog, and ‘my’ house, or ‘my’ father, ‘my’ country, and ‘my’ God. We not only resent the imputation that our watch is wrong, or our car shabby, but that our conception of the canals of Mars, of the pronunciation of ‘Epictetus,’ of the medicinal value of salicin, or of the date of Sargon I is subject to revision. We like to continue to believe what we have been accustomed to accept as true, and the resentment aroused when doubt is cast upon any of our assumptions leads us to seek every manner of excuse for clinging to it. The result is that most of our so-called reasoning consists in finding arguments for going on believing as we already do." (Chapter:2 A Sure Way of Making Enemies – and How to Avoid It)
- "I have found it of enormous value when I can permit myself to understand the other person. The way in which I have worded this statement may seem strange to you. Is it necessary to permit oneself to understand another? I think it is. Our first reaction to most of the statements (which we hear from other people) is an evaluation or judgment, rather than an understanding of it. When someone expresses some feeling, attitude or belief, our tendency is almost immediately to feel ‘that’s right,’ or ‘that’s stupid,’ ‘that’s abnormal,’ ‘that’s unreasonable,’ ‘that’s incorrect,’ ‘that’s not nice.’ Very rarely do we permit ourselves to understand precisely what the meaning of the statement is to the other person.1" (Chapter:2 A Sure Way of Making Enemies – and How to Avoid It)
- "The next day another friend dropped in, admired the draperies, bubbled over with enthusiasm, and expressed a wish that she could afford such exquisite creations for her home. My reaction was totally different. ‘Well, to tell the truth,’ I said, ‘I can’t afford them myself. I paid too much. I’m sorry I ordered them.’ When we are wrong, we may admit it to ourselves. And if we are handled gently and tactfully, we may admit it to others and even take pride in our frankness and broad-mindedness. But not if someone else is trying to ram the unpalatable fact down our oesophagus." (Chapter:2 A Sure Way of Making Enemies – and How to Avoid It)
- "‘I judge people by their own principles – not by my own.’" (Chapter:2 A Sure Way of Making Enemies – and How to Avoid It)
- "That policeman, being human, wanted a feeling of importance; so when I began to condemn myself, the only way he could nourish his self-esteem was to take the magnanimous attitude of showing mercy." (Chapter:3 If You’re Wrong, Admit It)
- " ‘a drop of honey catches more flies than a gallon of gall.’ " (Chapter:4 A Drop of Honey)
- "The sun can make you take off your coat more quickly than the wind; and kindliness, the friendly approach and appreciation can make people change their minds more readily than all the bluster and storming in the world." (Chapter:4 A Drop of Honey)
- "A ‘No’ response, according to Professor Overstreet,1 is a most difficult handicap to overcome. When you have said ‘No,’ all your pride of personality demands that you remain consistent with yourself. You may later feel that the ‘No’ was ill-advised; nevertheless, there is your precious pride to consider! " (Chapter:5 The Secret of Socrates)
- "His whole technique, now called the ‘Socratic method,’ was based upon getting a ‘yes, yes’ response. He asked questions with which his opponent would have to agree. He kept on winning one admission after another until he had an armful of yeses. He kept on asking questions until finally, almost without realising it, his opponents found themselves embracing a conclusion they would have bitterly denied a few minutes previously." (Chapter:5 The Secret of Socrates)
- "DON’T YOU HAVE much more faith in ideas that you discover for yourself than in ideas that are handed to you on a silver platter? If so, isn’t it bad judgement to try to ram your opinions down the throats of other people? Isn’t it wiser to make suggestions – and let the other person think out the conclusion?" (Chapter:7 How to Get Cooperation)
- "‘The people had made a sort of moral bargain with me,’ said Mr. Seltz, ‘and as long as I lived up to my part in it, they were determined to live up to theirs. Consulting them about their wishes and desires was just the shot in the arm they needed.’" (Chapter:7 How to Get Cooperation)
- "No one likes to feel that he or she is being sold something or told to do a thing. We much prefer to feel that we are buying of our own accord or acting on our own ideas. We like to be consulted about our wishes, our wants, our thoughts." (Chapter:7 How to Get Cooperation)
- "‘I realised why I had failed for years to sell him,’ said Mr. Wesson. ‘I had urged him to buy what I thought he ought to have. Then I changed my approach completely. I urged him to give me his ideas. This made him feel that he was creating the designs. And he was. I didn’t have to sell him. He bought.’" (Chapter:7 How to Get Cooperation)
- "‘In every work of genius we recognise our own rejected thoughts; they come back to us with a certain alienated majesty.’" (Chapter:7 How to Get Cooperation)
- "‘The reason why rivers and seas receive the homage of a hundred mountain streams is that they keep below them. Thus they are able to reign over all the mountain streams. So the sage, wishing to be above men, putteth himself below them; wishing to be before them, he putteth himself behind them. Thus, though his place be above men, they do not feel his weight; though his place be before them, they do not count it an injury.’ " (Chapter:7 How to Get Cooperation)
- "I would rather walk the sidewalk in front of a person’s office for two hours before an interview,’ said Dean Donham of the Harvard business school, ‘than step into that office without a perfectly clear idea of what I was going to say and what that person – from my knowledge of his or her interests and motives – was likely to answer.’" (Chapter:8 A Formula That Will Work Wonders for You)
- "‘I don’t blame you one iota for feeling as you do. If I were you I would undoubtedly feel just as you do.’" (Chapter:9 What Everybody Wants)
- "Three-fourths of the people you will ever meet are hungering and thirsting for sympathy. Give it to them, and they will love you." (Chapter:9 What Everybody Wants)
- "So, because I had apologised and sympathised with her point of view, she began apologising and sympathising with my point of view. " (Chapter:9 What Everybody Wants)
- "Sympathy the human species universally craves. The child eagerly displays his injury; or even inflicts a cut or bruise in order to reap abundant sympathy. For the same purpose adults . . . show their bruises, relate their accidents, illness, especially details of surgical operations. “Self-pity” for misfortunes real or imaginary is, in some measure, practically a universal practice.’" (Chapter:9 What Everybody Wants)
- "J. Pierpont Morgan observed, in one of his analytical interludes, that a person usually has two reasons for doing a thing: one that sounds good and a real one." (Chapter:10 An Appeal That Everybody Likes)
- "‘That when no information can be secured about the customer, the only sound basis on which to proceed is to assume that he or she is sincere, honest, truthful and willing and anxious to pay the charges, once convinced they are correct. To put it differently and perhaps more clearly, people are honest and want to discharge their obligations. The exceptions to that rule are comparatively few, and I am convinced that the individuals who are inclined to chisel will in most cases react favourably if you make them feel that you consider them honest, upright and fair.’" (Chapter:10 An Appeal That Everybody Likes)
- "The truth has to be made vivid, interesting, dramatic. You have to use showmanship. The movies do it. Television does it. And you will have to do it if you want attention." (Chapter:11 The Movies Do It. TV Does It. Why Don’t You Do It?)
- "You can dramatise your ideas in business or in any other aspect of your life. It’s easy. Jim Yeamans, who sells for the NCR company (National Cash Register) in Richmond, Virginia, told how he made a sale by dramatic demonstration. ‘Last week I called on a neighbourhood grocer and saw that the cash registers he was using at his checkout counters were very old-fashioned. I approached the owner and told him: “You are literally throwing away pennies every time a customer goes through your line.” With that I threw a handful of pennies on the floor. He quickly became more attentive. The mere words should have been of interest to him, but the sound of pennies hitting the floor really stopped him. I was able to get an order from him to replace all of his old machines.’" (Chapter:11 The Movies Do It. TV Does It. Why Don’t You Do It?)
- "When the old-time lover proposed to his sweetheart, did he just use words of love? No! He went down on his knees. That really showed he meant what he said. We don’t propose on our knees any more, but many suitors still set up a romantic atmosphere before they pop the question." (Chapter:11 The Movies Do It. TV Does It. Why Don’t You Do It?)
- "‘The way to get things done,’ says Schwab, ‘is to stimulate competition. I do not mean in a sordid money-getting way, but in the desire to excel.’ The desire to excel! The challenge! Throwing down the gauntlet! An infallible way of appealing to people of spirit." (Chapter:12 When Nothing Else Works, Try This)
- "Then Thomas Collier Platt, then U.S. Senator from New York, threw down the challenge. Turning suddenly on Theodore Roosevelt, he cried in a ringing voice: ‘Is the hero of San Juan Hill a coward?’ Roosevelt stayed in the fight – and the rest is history. A challenge not only changed his life; it had a real effect upon the future of his nation." (Chapter:12 When Nothing Else Works, Try This)
- "‘All men have fears, but the brave put down their fears and go forward, sometimes to death, but always to victory’ was the motto of the King’s Guard in ancient Greece. What greater challenge can be offered than the opportunity to overcome those fears?" (Chapter:12 When Nothing Else Works, Try This)
- "The one major factor that motivated people was the work itself. If the work was exciting and interesting, the worker looked forward to doing it and was motivated to do a good job." (Chapter:12 When Nothing Else Works, Try This)
- "That is what every successful person loves: the game. The chance for self-expression. The chance to prove his or her worth, to excel, to win. That is what makes foot-races, and hog-calling, and pie-eating contests. The desire to excel. The desire for a feeling of importance." (Chapter:12 When Nothing Else Works, Try This)
- "IN A NUTSHELL WIN PEOPLE TO YOUR WAY OF THINKING PRINCIPLE 1 The only way to get the best of an argument is to avoid it. PRINCIPLE 2 Show respect for the other person’s opinions. Never say, ‘You’re wrong.’ PRINCIPLE 3 If you are wrong, admit it quickly and emphatically. PRINCIPLE 4 Begin in a friendly way. PRINCIPLE 5 Get the other person saying ‘yes, yes’ immediately. PRINCIPLE 6 Let the other person do a great deal of the talking. PRINCIPLE 7 Let the other person feel that the idea is his or hers. PRINCIPLE 8 Try honestly to see things from the other person’s point of view. PRINCIPLE 9 Be sympathetic with the other person’s ideas and desires. PRINCIPLE 10 Appeal to the nobler motives. PRINCIPLE 11 Dramatise your ideas. PRINCIPLE 12 Throw down a challenge. ￼" (Chapter:12 When Nothing Else Works, Try This)
- "It is always easier to listen to unpleasant things after we have heard some praise of our good points." (Chapter:1 If You Must Find Fault, This Is the Way to Begin)
- "A barber lathers a man before he shaves him;" (Chapter:1 If You Must Find Fault, This Is the Way to Begin)
- "obstreperous general " (Chapter:1 If You Must Find Fault, This Is the Way to Begin)
- "‘Do you know you are the only person in Brooklyn with your name?’ Mr. Gaw asked the president of the subcontracting firm shortly after they were introduced. The president was surprised. ‘No, I didn’t know that.’ ‘Well,’ said Mr. Gaw, ‘when I got off the train this morning, I looked in the telephone book to get your address, and you’re the only person in the Brooklyn phone book with your name.’ ‘I never knew that,’ the subcontractor said. He checked the phone book with interest. ‘Well, it’s an unusual name,’ he said proudly. ‘My family came from Holland and settled in New York almost two hundred years ago.’ He continued to talk about his family and his ancestors for several minutes. When he finished that, Mr. Gaw complimented him on how large a plant he had and compared it favourably with a number of similar plants he had visited. ‘It is one of the cleanest and neatest bronze factories I ever saw.’ said Gaw. ‘I’ve spent a lifetime building up this business,’ the subcontractor said, ‘and I am rather proud of it. Would you like to take a look around the factory?’ During this tour of inspection, Mr. Gaw complimented the other man on his system of fabrication and told him how and why it seemed superior to those of some of his competitors. Gaw commented on some unusual machines, and the subcontractor announced that he himself had invented those machines. He spent considerable time showing Gaw how they operated and the superior work they turned out. He insisted on taking his visitor to lunch. So far, mind you, not a word had been said about the real purpose of Gaw’s visit. After lunch, the subcontractor said, ‘Now, to get down to business. Naturally, I know why you’re here. I didn’t expect that our meeting would be so enjoyable. You can go back to Philadelphia with my promise that your material will be fabricated and shipped, even if other orders have to be delayed.’" (Chapter:1 If You Must Find Fault, This Is the Way to Begin)
- "Beginning with praise is like the dentist who begins his work with Novocain. The patient still gets a drilling, but the Novocain is pain-killing. A leader will use . . ." (Chapter:1 If You Must Find Fault, This Is the Way to Begin)
- "CHARLES SCHWAB WAS passing through one of his steel mills one day at noon when he came across some of his employees smoking. Immediately above their heads was a sign that said ‘No Smoking.’ Did Schwab point to the sign and say, ‘Can’t you read?’ Oh no, not Schwab. He walked over to the men, handed each one a cigar, and said, ‘I’ll appreciate it, boys, if you will smoke these on the outside.’ They knew that he knew that they had broken a rule – and they admired him because he said nothing about it and gave them a little present and made them feel important. Couldn’t keep from loving a man like that, could you?" (Chapter:2 How to Criticise – and Not Be Hated for It)
- "frequently admonished his staff " (Chapter:2 How to Criticise – and Not Be Hated for It)
- "Many people begin their criticism with sincere praise followed by the word ‘but’ and ending with a critical statement. For example, in trying to change a child’s careless attitude toward studies, we might say, ‘We’re really proud of you, Johnnie, for raising your grades this term. But if you had worked harder on your algebra, the results would have been better.’ In this case, Johnnie might feel encouraged until he heard the word ‘but.’ He might then question the sincerity of the original praise. To him, the praise seemed only to be a contrived lead-in to a critical inference of failure. Credibility would be strained, and we probably would not achieve our objectives of changing Johnnie’s attitude toward his studies." (Chapter:2 How to Criticise – and Not Be Hated for It)
- "This could be easily overcome by changing the word ‘but’ to ‘and.’ " (Chapter:2 How to Criticise – and Not Be Hated for It)
- "antagonise the builders" (Chapter:2 How to Criticise – and Not Be Hated for It)
- "It isn’t nearly so difficult to listen to a recital of your faults if the person criticising begins by humbly admitting that he, too, is far from impeccable." (Chapter:3 Talk About Your Own Mistakes First)
- "in the midst of all this consternation" (Chapter:3 Talk About Your Own Mistakes First)
- "staunch friend" (Chapter:3 Talk About Your Own Mistakes First)
- "Naturally, I didn’t want David to smoke,’ Mr. Zerhusen told us, ‘but his mother and I smoked cigarettes; we were giving him a bad example all the time. I explained to Dave how I started smoking at about his age and how the nicotine had gotten the best of me and now it was nearly impossible for me to stop. I reminded him how irritating my cough was and how he had been after me to give up cigarettes not many years before. ‘I didn’t exhort him to stop or make threats or warn him about their dangers. All I did was point out how I was hooked on cigarettes and what it had meant to me. ‘He thought about it for a while and decided he wouldn’t smoke until he had graduated from high school. As the years went by David never did start smoking and has no intention of ever doing so. ‘As a result of that conversation I made the decision to stop smoking cigarettes myself, and with the support of my family, I have succeeded.’" (Chapter:3 Talk About Your Own Mistakes First)
- "A technique like that makes it easy for a person to correct errors. A technique like that saves a person’s pride and gives him or her a feeling of importance. It encourages cooperation instead of rebellion." (Chapter:4 No One Likes to Take Orders)
- "Resentment caused by a brash order may last a long time – even if the order was given to correct an obviously bad situation. " (Chapter:4 No One Likes to Take Orders)
- "When the student who owned the car responded, the instructor screamed: ‘Move that car and move it right now, or I’ll wrap a chain around it and drag it out of there.’ Now that student was wrong. The car should not have been parked there. But from that day on, not only did that student resent the instructor’s action, but all the students in the class did everything they could to give the instructor a hard time and make his job unpleasant." (Chapter:4 No One Likes to Take Orders)
- "Asking questions not only makes an order more palatable; it often stimulates the creativity of the persons whom you ask. People are more likely to accept an order if they have had a part in the decision that caused the order to be issued." (Chapter:4 No One Likes to Take Orders)
- "We ride roughshod over the feelings of others" (Chapter:5 Let the Other Person Save Face)
- "Even if we are right and the other person is definitely wrong, we only destroy ego by causing someone to lose face. The legendary French aviation pioneer and author Antoine de Saint-Exupéry wrote: ‘I have no right to say or do anything that diminishes a man in his own eyes. What matters is not what I think of him, but what he thinks of himself. Hurting a man in his dignity is a crime.’ A real leader will always follow . . ." (Chapter:5 Let the Other Person Save Face)
- "For example, many years ago a boy of ten was working in a factory in Naples. He longed to be a singer, but his first teacher discouraged him. ‘You can’t sing,’ he said. ‘You haven’t any voice at all. It sounds like the wind in the shutters.’ But his mother, a poor peasant woman, put her arms about him and praised him and told him she knew he could sing, she could already see an improvement, and she went barefoot in order to save money to pay for his music lessons. That peasant mother’s praise and encouragement changed that boy’s life. His name was Enrico Caruso, and he became the greatest and most famous opera singer of his age." (Chapter:6 How to Spur People On to Success)
- "In the early nineteenth century, a young man in London aspired to be a writer. But everything seemed to be against him. He had never been able to attend school more than four years. His father had been flung in jail because he couldn’t pay his debts, and this young man often knew the pangs of hunger. Finally, he got a job pasting labels on bottles of blacking in a rat-infested warehouse, and he slept at night in a dismal attic room with two other boys – guttersnipes from the slums of London. He had so little confidence in his ability to write that he sneaked out and mailed his first manuscript in the dead of night so nobody would laugh at him. Story after story was refused. Finally the great day came when one was accepted. True, he wasn’t paid a shilling for it, but one editor had praised him. One editor had given him recognition. He was so thrilled that he wandered aimlessly around the streets with tears rolling down his cheeks. The praise, the recognition, that he received through getting one story in print, changed his whole life, for if it hadn’t been for that encouragement, he might have spent his entire life working in rat-infested factories. You may have heard of that boy. His name was Charles Dickens." (Chapter:6 How to Spur People On to Success)
- "What Mr. Roper did was not just flatter the young printer and say ‘You’re good.’ He specifically pointed out how his work was superior. Because he had singled out a specific accomplishment, rather than just making general flattering remarks, his praise became much more meaningful to the person to whom it was given. Everybody likes to be praised, but when praise is specific, it comes across as sincere – not something the other person may be saying just to make one feel good." (Chapter:6 How to Spur People On to Success)
- "Remember, we all crave appreciation and recognition, and will do almost anything to get it. But nobody wants insincerity. Nobody wants flattery." (Chapter:6 How to Spur People On to Success)
- "Compared with what we ought to be, we are only half awake. We are making use of only a small part of our physical and mental resources. Stating the thing broadly, the human individual thus lives far within his limits. He possesses powers of various sorts which he habitually fails to use." (Chapter:6 How to Spur People On to Success)
- "shoddy work" (Chapter:7 Give a Dog a Good Name)
- "‘The average person,’ said Samuel Vauclain, then president of the Baldwin Locomotive Works, ‘can be led readily if you have his or her respect and if you show that you respect that person for some kind of ability.’" (Chapter:7 Give a Dog a Good Name)
- "In short, if you want to improve a person in a certain respect, act as though that particular trait were already one of his or her outstanding characteristics. Shakespeare said ‘Assume a virtue, if you have it not.’ " (Chapter:7 Give a Dog a Good Name)
- "‘Give a dog a bad name and you may as well hang him.’ But give him a good name – and see what happens!" (Chapter:7 Give a Dog a Good Name)
- "America was aghast" (Chapter:9 Making People Glad to Do What You Want)
- "Always make the other person happy about doing the thing you suggest." (Chapter:9 Making People Glad to Do What You Want)
- " ‘One of Jeff’s chores was to pick up pears from under the pear tree so the person " (Chapter:9 Making People Glad to Do What You Want)
- "I knew a man who had to refuse many invitations to speak, invitations extended by friends, invitations coming from people to whom he was obligated; and yet he did it so adroitly that the other person was at least contented with his refusal. How did he do it? Not by merely talking about the fact that he was too busy and too-this and too-that. No, after expressing his appreciation of the invitation and regretting his inability to accept it, he suggested a substitute speaker. In other words, he didn’t give the other person any time to feel unhappy about the refusal. He immediately changed the other person’s thoughts to some other speaker who could accept the invitation." (Chapter:9 Making People Glad to Do What You Want)
- "Napoleon when he created the Legion of Honour and distributed 15,000 crosses to his soldiers and made eighteen of his generals ‘Marshals of France’ and called his troops the ‘Grand Army.’ Napoleon was criticised for giving ‘toys’ to war-hardened veterans, and Napoleon replied, ‘Men are ruled by toys.’" (Chapter:9 Making People Glad to Do What You Want)
- "BE A LEADER A leader’s job often includes changing your people’s attitudes and behaviour. Some suggestions to accomplish this: PRINCIPLE 1 Begin with praise and honest appreciation. PRINCIPLE 2 Call attention to people’s mistakes indirectly. PRINCIPLE 3 Talk about your own mistakes before criticising the other person. PRINCIPLE 4 Ask questions instead of giving direct orders. PRINCIPLE 5 Let the other person save face. PRINCIPLE 6 Praise the slightest improvement and praise every improvement. Be ‘hearty in your approbation and lavish in your praise.’ PRINCIPLE 7 Give the other person a fine reputation to live up to. PRINCIPLE 8 Use encouragement. Make the fault seem easy to correct. PRINCIPLE 9 Make the other person happy about doing the thing you suggest." (Chapter:9 Making People Glad to Do What You Want)
- "The first speaker bore the Gaelic name Patrick J. O’Haire. Born in Ireland, he attended school for only four years, drifted to America, worked as a mechanic, then as a chauffeur. Now, however, he was forty, he had a growing family and needed more money, so he tried selling trucks. Suffering from an inferiority complex that, as he put it, was eating his heart out, he had to walk up and down in front of an office half a dozen times before he could summon up enough courage to open the door. He was so discouraged as a salesman that he was thinking of going back to working with his hands in a machine shop, when one day he received a letter inviting him to an organisation meeting of the Dale Carnegie Course in Effective Speaking. He didn’t want to attend. He feared he would have to associate with a lot of college graduates, that he would be out of place. His despairing wife insisted that he go, saying, ‘It may do you some good, Pat. God knows you need it.’ He went down to the place where the meeting was to be held and stood on the sidewalk for five minutes before he could generate enough self-confidence to enter the room. The first few times he tried to speak in front of the others, he was dizzy with fear. But as the weeks drifted by, he lost all fear of audiences and soon found that he loved to talk – the bigger the crowd, the better. And he also lost his fear of individuals and of his superiors. He presented his ideas to them, and soon he had been advanced into the sales department. He had become a valued and much liked member of his company. This night, in the Hotel Pennsylvania, Patrick O’Haire stood in front of twenty-five hundred people and told a gay, rollicking story of his achievements. Wave after wave of laughter swept over the audience. Few professional speakers could have equalled his performance." (Chapter:A Shortcut to Distinction)
- "The next speaker, Godfrey Meyer, was a grey-headed banker, the father of eleven children. The first time he had attempted to speak in class, he was literally struck dumb. His mind refused to function. His story is a vivid illustration of how leadership gravitates to the person who can talk. He worked on Wall Street, and for twenty-five years he had been living in Clifton, New Jersey. During that time, he had taken no active part in community affairs and knew perhaps five hundred people. Shortly after he had enrolled in the Carnegie course, he received his tax bill and was infuriated by what he considered unjust charges. Ordinarily, he would have sat at home and fumed, or he would have taken it out in grousing to his neighbours. But instead, he put on his hat that night, walked into the town meeting, and blew off steam in public. As a result of that talk of indignation, the citizens of Clifton, New Jersey, urged him to run for the town council. So for weeks he went from one meeting to another, denouncing waste and municipal extravagance. There were ninety-six candidates in the field. When the ballots were counted, lo, Godfrey Meyer’s name led all the rest. Almost overnight, he had become a public figure among the forty thousand people in his community. As a result of his talks, he made eighty times more friends in six weeks than he had been able to previously in twenty-five years." (Chapter:A Shortcut to Distinction)
