---
title: "Book Notes: Rich Dad, Poor Dad - Kiyosaki, Robert"
date: "2018-03-06"
categories: 
  - "research"
---

- "For example, one dad had a habit of saying, “I can't afford it.” The other dad forbade those words to be used. He insisted I say, “How can I afford it?” One is a statement, and the other is a question. One lets you off the hook, and the other forces you to think. " (Chapter:CHAPTER ONE)
- "“OK, here's my offer. I'll teach you, but I won't do it classroom-style. You work for me, I'll teach you. You don't work for me, I won't teach you. I can teach you faster if you work, and I'm wasting my time if you just want to sit and listen, like you do in school. That's my offer. Take it or leave it.”" (Chapter:CHAPTER TWO)
- "If you can't make up you mind decisively, then you'll never learn to make money anyway. Opportunities come and go. Being able to know when to make quick decisions is an important skill. You have an opportunity that you asked for." (Chapter:CHAPTER TWO)
- "“If you learn life's lessons, you will do well. If not, life will just continue to push you around. People do two things. Some just let life push them around. Others get angry and push back. But they push back against their boss, or their job, or their husband or wife. They do not know it's life that's pushing.”" (Chapter:CHAPTER TWO)
- ". “Or if you're the kind of person who has no guts, you just give up every time life pushes you. If you're that kind of person, you'll live all your life playing it safe, doing the right things, saving yourself for some event that never happens. Then, you die a boring old man. You'll have lots of friends who really like you because you were such a nice hard-working guy. You spent a life playing it safe, doing the right things. But the truth is, you let life push you into submission. Deep down you were terrified of taking risks. You really wanted to win, but the fear of losing was greater than the excitement of winning. Deep inside, you and only you will know you didn't go for it. You chose to play it safe.”" (Chapter:CHAPTER TWO)
- "“You boys are the first people that have ever asked me to teach them how to make money. I have more than 150 employees, and not one of them has asked me what I know about money. They ask me for a job and a paycheck, but never to teach them about money. So most will spend the best years of their lives working for money, not really understanding what it is they are working for.”" (Chapter:CHAPTER TWO)
- "If you think I'm the problem, then you have to change me. If you realize that you're the problem, then you can change yourself, learn something and grow wiser. Most people want everyone else in the world to change but themselves. Let me tell you, it's easier to change yourself than everyone else.”" (Chapter:CHAPTER TWO)
- "“The poor and the middle class work for money.” “The rich have money work for them.”" (Chapter:CHAPTER TWO)
- "“I'm glad you got angry about working for 10 cents an hour. If you had not gotten angry and had gladly accepted it, I would have to tell you that I could not teach you. You see, true learning takes energy, passion, a burning desire. Anger is a big part of that formula, for passion is anger and love combined. When it comes to money, most people want to play it safe and feel secure. So passion does not direct them: Fear does.”" (Chapter:CHAPTER TWO)
- " “Most people have a price. And they have a price because of human emotions named fear and greed. First, the fear of being without money motivates us to work hard, and then once we get that paycheck, greed or desire starts us thinking about all the wonderful things money can buy. The pattern is then set.” “What pattern?” I asked. “The pattern of get up, go to work, pay bills, get up, go to work, pay bills... Their lives are then run forever by two emotions, fear and greed. Offer them more money, and they continue the cycle by also increasing their spending. This is what I call the Rat Race.”" (Chapter:CHAPTER TWO)
- "“You see, we're all employees ultimately. We just work at different levels,” said rich dad. “I just want you boys to have a chance to avoid the trap. The trap caused by those two emotions, fear and desire. Use them in your favor, not against you. That's what I want to teach you. I'm not interested in just teaching you to make a pile of money. That won't handle the fear or desire. If you don't first handle fear and desire, and you get rich, you'll only be a high-paid slave.”" (Chapter:CHAPTER TWO)
- "“How did you feel when I tempted you with a pay raise? Did you notice your desires rising?” We nodded our heads. “By not giving in to your emotions, you were able to delay your reactions and think. That is most important. We will always have emotions of fear and greed. From here on in, it is most important for you to use those emotions to your advantage and for the long term, and not simply let your emotions run you by controlling your thinking. Most people use fear and greed against themselves. That's the start of ignorance. Most people live their lives chasing paychecks, pay raises and job security because of the emotions of desire and fear, not really questioning where those emotion-driven thoughts are leading them. It's just like the picture of a donkey, dragging a cart, with its owner dangling a carrot just in front of the donkey's nose. The donkey's owner may be going where he wants to go, but the donkey is chasing an illusion. Tomorrow there will only be another carrot for the donkey.”" (Chapter:CHAPTER TWO)
- "“So is there an answer?” asked Mike. “Yes,” said rich dad. “Learn to use your emotions to think, not think with your emotions. When you boys mastered your emotions, first by agreeing to work for free, I knew there was hope. When you again resisted your emotions when I tempted you with more money, you were again learning to think in spite of being emotionally charged. That's the first step.”" (Chapter:CHAPTER TWO)
- "“Choosing our thoughts?” Mike asked, puzzled. “Yes. Choosing what we think rather than reacting to our emotions. Instead of just getting up and going to work to solve your problems, just because the fear of not having the money to pay your bills is scaring you. Thinking would be taking the time to ask yourself a question. A question like, \`Is working harder at this the best solution to this problem?' Most people are so terrified at not telling themselves the truth-that fear is in control-that they cannot think, and instead run out the door. Tar baby is in control. That's what I mean by choosing your thoughts.”" (Chapter:CHAPTER TWO)
- "As he climbed into his pickup truck, outside of his little convenience store, he said, “Keep working boys, but the sooner you forget about needing a paycheck, the easier your adult life will be. Keep using your brain, work for free, and soon your mind will show you ways of making money far beyond what I could ever pay you. You will see things that other people never see. Opportunities right in front of their noses. Most people never see these opportunities because they're looking for money and security, so that's all they get. The moment you see one opportunity, you will see them for the rest of your life. The moment you do that, I'll teach you something else. Learn this, and you'll avoid one of life's biggest traps. You'll never, ever, touch that Tar Baby.”" (Chapter:CHAPTER TWO)
- "Rule One. You must know the difference between an asset and a liability, and buy assets. If you want to be rich, this is all you need to know. It is Rule No. 1. It is the only rule. This may sound absurdly simple, but most people have no idea how profound this rule is. Most people struggle financially because they do not know the difference between an asset and a liability." (Chapter:CHAPTER THREE)
- "“Rich people acquire assets. The poor and middle class acquire liabilities, but they think they are assets”" (Chapter:CHAPTER THREE)
- "As a child, my dad often told us that the Japanese were aware of three powers; “The power of the sword, the jewel and the mirror.” The sword symbolizes the power of weapons. America has spent trillions of dollars on weapons and, because of this, is the supreme military presence in the world. The jewel symbolizes the power of money. There is some degree of truth to the saying, “Remember the golden rule. He who has the gold makes the rules.” The mirror symbolizes the power of self-knowledge. This self-knowledge, according to Japanese legend, was the most treasured of the three." (Chapter:CHAPTER THREE)
- "It is said that the fear of public speaking is a fear greater than death for most people. According to psychiatrists, the fear of public speaking is caused by the fear of ostracism, the fear of standing out, the fear of criticism, the fear of ridicule, the fear of being an outcast. The fear of being different prevents most people from seeking new ways to solve their problems. That is why my educated dad said the Japanese valued the power of the mirror the most, for it is only when we as humans look into the mirror do we find truth. And the main reason that most people say "Play it safe1' is out of fear. That goes for anything, be it sports, relationships, career, money. It is that same fear, the fear of ostracism that causes people to conform and not question commonly accepted opinions or popular trends. “Your home is an asset.” “Get a bill consolidation loan and get out of debt.” “Work harder.” “It's a promotion.” “Someday I'll be a vice president.” “Save money.” “When ! get a raise, I'll buy us a bigger house.” “Mutual funds are safe.” “Tickle Me Elmo dolls are out of stock, but I just happen to have one in back that another customer has not come by for yet.” Many great financial problems are caused by going along with the crowd and trying to keep up with the Joneses. Occasionally, we all need to look in the mirror and be true to our inner wisdom rather than our fears." (Chapter:CHAPTER THREE)
- "He use to tell us over and over again. “An intelligent person hires people who are more intelligent than they are.” " (Chapter:CHAPTER THREE)
- " Just remember this simple observation: The rich buy assets. The poor only have expenses. The middle class buys liabilities they think are assets. So how do I start minding my own business? What is the answer? Listen to the founder of McDonald's" (Chapter:CHAPTER THREE)
- ""Mind your own business/' Financial struggle is often directly the result of people working all their life for someone else. Many people will have nothing at the end of their working days." (Chapter:CHAPTER FOUR)
- "A problem with school is that you often become what you study. So if you study, say, cooking, you become a chef. If you study the law, you become an attorney, and a study of auto mechanics makes you a mechanic. The mistake in becoming what you study is that too many people forget to mind their own business. They spend their lives minding someone else's business and making that person rich." (Chapter:CHAPTER FOUR)
- "So what kind of assets am I suggesting that you or your children acquire? In my world, real assets fall into several different categories: 1. Businesses that do not require my presence. I own them, but they are managed or run by other people. If I have to work there, it's not a business. It becomes my job. ?. Stocks. ?. Bonds. ?. Mutual funds. ?. Income-generating real estate. ?. Notes (lOUs). ?. Royalties from intellectual property such as music, scripts, patents. ?. 8. And anything else that has value, produces income or appreciates and has a ready market." (Chapter:CHAPTER FOUR)
- "As a young boy, my educated dad encouraged me to find a safe job. My rich dad, on the other hand, encouraged me to begin acquiring assets that I loved. “If you don't love it, you won't take care of it.” I collect real estate simply because I love buildings and land. I love shopping for them. 1 could look at them all day long. When problems arise, the problems are not so bad that it changes my love for real estate. For people who hate real estate, they shouldn't buy it." (Chapter:CHAPTER FOUR)
- "Fortunes are made in new-stock issues, and I love the game. Many people are afraid of small-cap companies and call them risky, and they are. But risk is always diminished if you love what the investment is, understand it and know the game. With small companies, my investment strategy is to be out of the stock in a year. My real estate strategy, on the other hand, is to start small and keep trading the properties up for bigger properties and, therefore, delaying paying taxes on the gain. This allows the value to increase dramatically. I generally hold real estate less than seven years." (Chapter:CHAPTER FOUR)
- "You may remember the first lesson I learned from my rich dad. I was a little boy of 9 who had to sit and wait for him to choose to talk to me. I often sat in his office waiting for him to “get to me.” He was ignoring me on purpose. He wanted me to recognize his power and desire to have that power for myself one day. For all the years I studied J and learned from him, he always reminded me that knowledge was power. And with money comes great power that requires the right knowledge to keep it and make it multiply. Without that knowledge, the world pushes you around. Rich dad constantly reminded Mike and me that the biggest bully was not the boss or the supervisor, but the tax man. The tax man will always take more if you let him." (Chapter:CHAPTER FIVE)
- "In 1974, while still an employee for Xerox, I formed my first corporation and began “minding my own business.” There were already a few assets in my asset column, but now I was determined to focus on making it bigger. Those paychecks with all the deductions made all the years of my rich dad's advice make total sense. I could see the future if I followed my educated dad's advice. Many employers feel that advising their workers to mind their own business is bad for business. I am sure it can be for certain individuals. But for me, focusing on my own business, developing assets, made me a better employee. I now had a purpose. I came in early and worked diligently, amassing as much money as possible so I could begin investing in real estate. Hawaii was just set to boom, and there were 4 fortunes to be made. The more I realized we were in the beginning stages of a boom, the more Xerox machines I sold. The more I sold, the more money I made, and, of course, the more deductions there were from my paycheck. It was inspiring. I wanted out of the trap of being an employee so badly that I worked harder, not less. By 1978,I was consistently one of the top five salespeople in sales, often No. 1. I badly wanted out of the rat race. In less than three years, I was making more in my own little corporation, which was a real estate holding company, than I was making at Xerox. And the money I was making in my asset column, in my own corporation, was money working for me. Not me pounding on doors selling copiers. My rich dad's advice made much more sense. Soon the cash flow from my properties was so strong that my company bought me my first Porsche. My fellow Xerox salespeople thought I was spending my commissions. I wasn't. I was investing my commissions in assets. My money was working hard to make more money. Each dollar in my asset column was a great employee, working hard to make more employees and buy the boss a new Porsche with before-tax dollars. I began to work harder for Xerox. The plan was working, and my Porsche was the proof." (Chapter:CHAPTER FIVE)
- "We all have tremendous potential, and we all are blessed with gifts. Yet, the one thing that holds all of us back is some degree of self-doubt. It is not so much the lack of technical information that holds us back, but more the lack of self-confidence. Some are more affected than others." (Chapter:CHAPTER SIX)
- "Often in the real world, it's not the smart that get ahead but the bold." (Chapter:CHAPTER SIX)
- "Since 1984, I have made millions simply by doing what the school system does not. In school, most teachers lecture. I hated lectures as a student; I was soon bored and my mind would drift. In 1984,I began teaching via games and simulations." (Chapter:CHAPTER SIX)
- "I had a great career ahead of me, yet I resigned after six months with the company and joined the Marine Corps to learn how to fly. My educated dad was devastated. Rich dad congratulated me. In school and in the workplace, the popular opinion is the idea of “specialization.” That is, in order to make more money or get promoted, you need to “specialize.” That is why medical doctors immediately begin to seek a specialty such as orthopedics or pediatrics. The same is true for accountants, architects, lawyers, pilots and others. My educated dad believed in the same dogma. That is why he was thrilled when he eventually achieved his doctorate. He often admitted •;• that schools reward people who study more and more about less and less. Rich dad encouraged me to do exactly the opposite. “You want to ' know a little about a lot” was his suggestion. That is why for years I worked in different areas of his companies. For awhile, I worked in his accounting department. Although I would probably never have been an accountant, he wanted me to learn via “osmosis.” Rich dad knew I would pick up “jargon” and a sense of what is important and what is not. I also worked as a bus boy and construction worker, as well as in sales, reservations and marketing. He was “grooming” Mike and me. That is why he insisted we sit in on the meetings with his bankers, lawyers, accountants and brokers. He wanted us to know a little about every aspect of his empire. When I quit my high-paying job with Standard Oil, my educated dad had a heart-to-heart with me. He was bewildered. He could not understand my decision to resign from a career that offered high pay, great benefits, lots of time off, and opportunity for promotion. When he asked me one evening, “Why did you quit?” I could not explain it to him, as much as I tried. My logic did not fit his logic. The big problem wasthat my logic was my rich dad's logic." (Chapter:CHAPTER SEVEN)
- "There is an old cliche that goes, “Job is an acronym for 'Just Over Broke.'”" (Chapter:CHAPTER SEVEN)
- "There is another horrible management theory that goes, “Workers work hard enough to not be fired, and owners pay just enough so that workers won't quit.” And if you look at the pay scales of most companies, again I would say there is a degree of truth in that statement." (Chapter:CHAPTER SEVEN)
- "The question I often ask people is, “Where is this daily activity taking you?” Just like the little hamster, I wonder if people look at where their hard work is taking them. What does the future hold?" (Chapter:CHAPTER SEVEN)
- "When I speak to adults who want to earn more money, I always recommend the same thing. I suggest taking a long view of their life. Instead of simply working for the money and security, which I admit are important, I suggest they take a second job that will teach them a second skill. Often I recommend joining a network marketing company, also called multilevel marketing, if they want to learn sales skills. Some of these companies have excellent training programs that help people get over their fear of failure and rejection, which are the main reasons people /j are unsuccessful. Education is more valuable than money, in the long run." (Chapter:CHAPTER SEVEN)
- "But for those of you who might be on the fence when it comes to the idea of working to learn something new, I offer this word of encouragement: Life is much like going to the gym. The most painful part is deciding to go. Once you get past that, it's easy. There have been many days I have dreaded going to the gym, but once I am there and in motion, it is a pleasure. After the workout is over, I am always glad I talked myself into going." (Chapter:CHAPTER SEVEN)
- "If you are unwilling to work to learn something new and insist on, instead, becoming highly specialized within your field, make sure the company you work for is unionized. Labor unions are designed to protect specialists." (Chapter:CHAPTER SEVEN)
- "When I ask the classes I teach, “How many of you can cook a better hamburger than McDonald's?” almost all the students raise their hands. I then ask, “So if most of you can cook a better hamburger, how come McDonald's makes more money than you?” The answer is obvious: McDonald's is excellent at business systems. The reason so many talented people are poor is because they focus on building a better hamburger and know little to nothing about business systems." (Chapter:CHAPTER SEVEN)
- "The world is filled with talented poor people. All too often, they're • poor or struggle financially or earn less than they are capable of, not f because of what they know but because of what they do not know. They focus on perfecting their skills at building a better hamburger rather than the skills of selling and delivering the hamburger. Maybe McDonald's does not make the best hamburger, but they are the best at f selling and delivering a basic average burger." (Chapter:CHAPTER SEVEN)
- "The main management skills needed for success are: 1. The management of cash flow 2. The management of systems (including yourself and time with family). 3. The management of people. The most important specialized skills are sales and understanding marketing. It is the ability to sell--therefore, to communicate to another human being, be it a customer, employee, boss, spouse or child-that is the base skill of personal success. It is communication skills such as writing, speaking and negotiating that are crucial to a life of success. It is a skill that I work on constantly, attending courses or buying educational tapes to expand my knowledge." (Chapter:CHAPTER SEVEN)
- "“Winning means being unafraid to lose.”" (Chapter:CHAPTER EIGHT)
- "Just as I also said that falling off my bike was part of learning to ride. I remember falling off only made me more determined to learn to ride. Not less. I also said that I have never met a golfer who has never lost a ball. To be a top professional golfer, losing a ball or a tournament only inspires golfers to be better, to practice harder, to study more. That's what makes them better. For winners, losing inspires them. For losers, losing defeats them. Quoting John D. Rockefeller, “I always tried to turn every disaster ' into an opportunity.” And being Japanese-American, I can say this. Many people say that Pearl Harbor was an American mistake. I say it was a Japanese mistake. From the movie Tora, Tora, Tom, a somber Japanese admiral says to his cheering subordinates, “I am afraid we have awakened a sleeping giant.” “Remember Pearl Harbor” became a rallying cry. It turned one of America's greatest losses into the reason to win. This great defeat gave America strength, and America soon emerged as a world power. Failure inspires winners. And failure defeats losers. " (Chapter:CHAPTER EIGHT)
- "The main reason that over 90 percent of the American public struggles financially is because they play not to lose. They don't play to win." (Chapter:CHAPTER EIGHT)
- "It's a great portfolio for someone who loves safely. But playing it safe and going “balanced” on your investment portfolio is not the way successful investors play the game. If you have little money and you want to be rich, you must first be “focused,” not “balanced.” If you look at anyone successful, at the start they were not balanced. Balanced people go nowhere. They stay in one spot. To make progress, you must first go unbalanced. Just look at how you make progress walking." (Chapter:CHAPTER EIGHT)
- "Thomas Edison was not balanced. He was focused. Bill Gates was not balanced. He was focused. Donald Trump is focused. George Soros is focused. George Patton did not take his tanks wide. He focused them and blew through the weak spots in the German line. The French went wide with the Maginot Line, and you know what happened to them." (Chapter:CHAPTER EIGHT)
- "They often say, “What makes you think you can do that?” Or “If it's such a good idea, how come someone else hasn't done it?” Or “That will never work. You don't know what you're talking about.” These words of doubt often get so loud that we fail to act." (Chapter:CHAPTER EIGHT)
- "The real estate market in Phoenix turned, and by 1994, that little unit was renting for $1,000 a month-$2,500 in the peak winter months. The unit was worth $95,000 in 1995. All Richard had to put down was $5,000 and he would have had a start at getting out of the rat race. Today, he still has done nothing. And the bargains in Phoenix are still here; you just have to look a lot harder. Richard's backing out did not surprise me. It's called “buyer's remorse,” and it affects all of us. It's those doubts that get us. The little 1 chicken won, and a chance at freedom was lost." (Chapter:CHAPTER EIGHT)
- " They just lack liquidity. So I look at them as 2 to 7-year CDs. Almost every time I tell someone, especially if they have money in CDs, that I hold my money this way, they will tell me it's risky. They tell me why I should not do it. When I ask them where they get their information, they say from a friend or an investment magazine. They've never done it, and they're telling someone who's doing it why they shouldn't. The lowest I yield I look for is 16 percent, but people who are filled with doubt are willing to accept 5 percent. Doubt is expensive. My point is that it's those doubts and cynicism that keep most people? poor and playing it safe. " (Chapter:CHAPTER EIGHT)
- "“Cynics never win,” said rich dad. “Unchecked doubt and fear creates i a cynic. Cynics criticize, and winners analyze” was another of his favorite sayings." (Chapter:CHAPTER EIGHT)
- "Too much greed, however, as anything in excess can be, is not good. But just remember what Michael Douglas said in the movie Wall Street. “Greed is good.” Rich dad said it differently: "Guilt is worse than greed." (Chapter:CHAPTER EIGHT)
- "Our lives are a reflection of our habits more than our education. " (Chapter:CHAPTER EIGHT)
- "Arrogance is ego plus ignorance" (Chapter:CHAPTER EIGHT)
- "Every time I have been arrogant, I have lost money. Because when I'm arrogant, I truly believe that what I don't know is not important,” rich dad would often tell me." (Chapter:CHAPTER EIGHT)
- " I once met a young woman who had dreams of swimming for the U.S Olympic team. The reality was, she had to get up every morning at 4 a.m. to swim for three hours before going to school. She did not party with her friends on Saturday night. She had to study and keep her grades up, just like everyone else. When I asked her what compelled her with such super-human ambition and sacrifice, she simply said, “I do it for myself and the people I love. It's love that gets me over the hurdles and sacrifices.”" (Chapter:CHAPTER NINE)
- "A truly intelligent person welcomes new ideas, for new ideas can add to the synergy of other accumulated ideas. Listening is more important than talking. " (Chapter:CHAPTER NINE)
- "Now I will admit that there are people I have actually sought out because they had money. But I was not after their money; I was seeking their knowledge. In some cases, these people who had money have become dear friends, but not all. But there is one distinction that I would like to point out. I've noticed that my friends with money talk about money. And I do not mean brag. They're interested in the subject. So I learn from them, and they learn from me. My friends, whom I know are in dire straits financially, do not like talking about money, business or investing." (Chapter:CHAPTER NINE)
- "If you watch CNBC, which is a goldmine of investment information, they often have a panel of so-called “experts.” One expert will say the market is going to crash, and the other will say it's going to boom. If you're smart, you listen to both. Keep your mind open because both have valid points. Unfortunately, most poor people listen to “Chicken Little.”" (Chapter:CHAPTER NINE)
- "I would say that one of the hardest things about wealth building is to be true to yourself and be willing to not go along with the crowd. For in the market, it is usually the crowd that shows up late and is slaughtered." (Chapter:CHAPTER NINE)
- "Most of us have heard the saying “You are what you eat.” I have a different slant on the same saying. I say, “You become what you study.” In other words, be careful what you study and learn, because your mind is so powerful that you become what you put in your head. For example, if you study cooking, you then tend to cook. You become a cook. If you don't want to be a cook anymore, then you need to study something else. Let's say, a schoolteacher. After studying teaching, you often become a teacher. And so on. Choose what you study carefully." (Chapter:CHAPTER NINE)
- "Years ago, when I was 26,1 took a weekend class called “How to Buy Real Estate Foreclosures.” I learned a formula. The next trick was to have the discipline to actually put into action what I had learned. That is where most people stop." (Chapter:CHAPTER NINE)
- "Another side note. In today's fast-changing world, it's not so much what you know anymore that counts, because often what you know is old. It is how fast you learn. That skill is priceless. It's priceless in finding faster formulas-recipes, if you will, for making dough. Working hard for money is an old formula born in the day of cave men." (Chapter:CHAPTER NINE)
- "The power of self-discipline. If you cannot get control of yourself, do not try to get rich. You might first want to join the Marine Corps or some religious order so you can get control of yourself. It makes no sense to invest, make money and blow it. It is the lack of self-discipline that causes most lottery winners to go broke soon after winning millions. It is the lack of self-discipline that causes people who get a raise to immediately go out and buy a new car or take a cruise." (Chapter:CHAPTER NINE)
- "As I have said, a lesson learned from my rich dad was that “the world will push you around.” The world pushes people around not because other people are bullies, but because the individual lacks internal control and discipline. People who lack internal fortitude often become victims of those who have self-discipline." (Chapter:CHAPTER NINE)
- "The three most important management skills necessary to start your own business are: 1. Management of cash flow. 2. Management of people. 3. Management of personal time. I would say, the skills to manage these three apply to anything, not just entrepreneurs. The three matter in the way you live your life as an individual, or as part of a family, a business, a charitable organization, a city or a nation." (Chapter:CHAPTER NINE)
- "There have been months in my life, when for whatever reason, cash flow was far less than my bills. I still paid myself first. My accountant and bookkeeper screamed in panic. “They're going to come after you. The IRS is going to put you in jail.” “You're going to ruin your credit rating.” “They'll cut off the electricity.” I still paid myself first. “Why?” you ask. Because that's what the story The Richest Man In Babylon was all about. The power of self-discipline and the power of internal fortitude. “Guts,” in less elegant terms. As my rich dad taught me the first month I worked for him, most people allow the world to push them around. A bill collector calls and you “pay or else.” So you pay and not pay yourself. A sales clerk says, “Oh, just put it on your charge card.” Your real estate agent tells you to “go ahead-the government allows you a tax deduction on your home.” That is what the book is really about. Having the guts to go against the tide and get rich. You may not be weak, but when it comes to money, many people get wimpy." (Chapter:CHAPTER NINE)
- "The same is done with stocks. Frequently, my broker will call me and recommend I move a sizable amount of money into the stock of a company that he feels is just about to make a move that will add value to the stock, like announcing a new product. I will move my money in for a week to a month while the stock moves up. Then, I pull my initial dollar amount out, and stop worrying about the fluctuations of the market, because my initial money is back and ready to work on another asset. So my money goes in, and then it comes out, and I own an asset that was technically free." (Chapter:CHAPTER NINE)
- "On every one of my investments, there must be an upside, something for free. A condominium, a mini-storage, a piece of free land, a house, stock shares, office building. And there must be limited risk, or a low-risk idea. There are books devoted entirely to this subject that I will not get into here. Ray Kroc, of McDonald's fame, sold hamburger franchises, not because he loved hamburgers, but because he wanted the real estate ; under the franchise for free. So wise investors must look at more than ROI; it's the assets you get for free once you get your money back. That is financial intelligence. :" (Chapter:CHAPTER NINE)
- "Whenever you feel “short” or in “need” of something, give what you want first and it will come back in buckets. That is true for money, a smile, love, friendship. I know it is often the last thing a person may want to do, but; it has always worked for me" (Chapter:CHAPTER NINE)
- "Look for new ideas. For new investing ideas, I go to bookstores and look for books on different and unique subjects. I call them formulas. I buy how-to books on a formula I know nothing about. For example, it was in the bookstore that I found the book The 16 Percent Solution, by Joel Moskowitz. I bought the book and read it." (Chapter:CHAPTER TEN)
- "TAKE ACTION! The next Thursday, I did exactly as the book said. Step by step. I have also done that with finding real estate bargains in attorneys' offices and in banks. Most people do not take action, or they let someone talk them out of whatever new formula they are studying. My neighbor told me why 16 percent would not work. I did not listen to him because he's never done it. Find someone who has done what you want to do. Take them to lunch. Ask them for tips, for little tricks of the trade. " (Chapter:CHAPTER TEN)
- "Make offers. People who are not investors have no idea what it feels like to be trying to sell something. I have had a piece of real estate that I wanted to sell for months. I would have welcomed anything. I would not care how low the price. They could have offered me ten pigs and I would have been happy. Not at the offer, but just because someone was interested. I would have countered, maybe for a pig farm in exchange. But that's how the game works. The game of buying and selling is fun. Keep that in mind. It's fun and only a game. Make offers. Someone might say “yes.”" (Chapter:CHAPTER TEN)
- "And I always make offers with escape clauses. In real estate, I make an offer with the words “subject to approval of business partner.” I never specify who the business partner is. Most people do not know my partner is my cat. " (Chapter:CHAPTER TEN)
- "I look for people who want to buy first, then I look for someone who wants to sell." (Chapter:CHAPTER TEN)
- "I found a large piece of land larger than what my friend wanted to buy, tied it up with an option, called my friend and he wanted a piece of it. So I sold the piece to him and then bought the land. I kept the remaining land as mine for free. Moral of the story: Buy the pie and cut it in pieces. Most people look for what they can afford, so they look too small. They buy only a piece of the pie, so they end up paying more for less." (Chapter:CHAPTER TEN)
