---
title: "Book Notes: You Can Sell - Shiv Khera"
date: "2018-03-06"
categories: 
  - "research"
---

- " I started my presentation. By the time the man looked at his watch it was 11.30 at night I had still not made a sale. No wonder life insurance agents are called pests. " (Note: Between a yes or a no there's a maybe) (Chapter:1 A Chosen Profession)
- "All sales professionals are self-employed entrepreneurs and unless they consider themselves self-employed they will not succeed. " (Note: Working for yourself motivates and ignites passion.) (Chapter:2 Who is Not Selling?)
- "Some salespeople barely make a living while there are some in the same profession who make a killing. " (Note: i don't wanna make a living i wanna make a killing) (Chapter:4 Attitude Determines Success)
- "1.He realized that everyone would be at home that day. So, his chances of getting people through cold calls would be close to 100 per cent. 2.Normally, vacuum cleaner demonstrations are done in the evening or on weekends because if one person sees it they don’t take a decision till they have consulted their spouse. Many a times, it may just be an excuse, but the chances of losing the sale become higher. That day, however, both decision-makers would be home. If the client was serious then it would save him a second trip to repeat the demonstration. Hence, he would save time." (Note: A winner may be faster than a loser only by a noise finish just like in horse races.) (Chapter:4 Attitude Determines Success)
- "To amateurs, meeting targets and deadlines is stressful and demotivating instead of motivating. They develop an escapist behavior and could start negative habits like drinking and smoking in order to get away from commitment. They could look for artificial ways of relaxation. They would then try to practice high pressure and manipulative tactics to make a sale, which could easily backfire." (Note: Procrastination) (Chapter:8 Selling is a Rejection Business)
- "AS LONG AS YOU HAVE YOUR EYES ON THE GOAL, YOU DON’T SEE OBSTACLES Unless there is a change in behavior, learning has not taken place. Transformation only takes place when information is internalized. Most people who fail in life do so not because they lack talent but because they lack the burning desire." (Chapter:Preface)
- "Good sales professionals are goal driven. They realize that in life results are rewarded, not efforts. In cricket, no matter how many times a batsman scores 99 runs, nobody ever gives a grace run to call it a century!" (Chapter:1 A Chosen Profession)
- "For the next 3 months I went out selling and I thought I was putting in a 100 per cent effort. We all have our own perceptions of hard work. I broke the company’s record. Guess, how many sales I made? None! My manager called me and said, ‘I have been in the life insurance business for close to thirty-five years and I have seen some slow starts in my life, but I have never seen one like you. Don’t come back tomorrow, you are fired.’ I said, ‘Joe, at least hear me out before you fire me. I am not a doctor, an engineer or an accountant. I am only a Commerce graduate and I failed in my 10th grade. I’m not an educated person. I have a handicap. How do you expect performance out of me?’ That day, somebody spoke very harshly to me, and I am glad he did, because that was not anger, it was concern. Joe said, ‘You shut up and listen to me today. You don’t have a handicap, you have a bad attitude. It is people like you who ruin not only their own but their family’s lives, too. Do you know who has a handicap? It’s the doctor, engineer, attorney and accountant.’ I had never heard that before. I asked, ‘How do they have a handicap?’ He said, ‘Go check out all over the world. It is generally true (exceptions are different) that they have all picked their fields and they are stuck. You have not picked your field. Don’t you see the world is open to you? In fact, the world is waiting for you!’ I said, ‘Joe, I never thought from that point of view.’ He said, ‘Now that you are fired, you have all the time to think. Please leave my office.’" (Chapter:1 A Chosen Profession)
- "Joe, will you let me stay? Could you withdraw the papers to fire me, because if you fire me, I don’t know where to go! The only thing I know is to go back to washing cars and I don’t want to do it anymore. I make a commitment to you that I will not let you down. Please withdraw the papers.’ He looked at me and said, ‘Shiv, this is not your small one. This is your big one and I will only let you stay here if you make a commitment, not to me but, to yourself and your family. I will withdraw the papers.’ That day, I made a commitment to myself and that was a major turning point in my life. He withdrew the papers and let me stay. That year, I went ahead and sold close to $1 million worth of life insurance. The next year, I sold close to $3 million (including term insurance). The same year, I came to know from my manager that I had missed achieving the MDRT (qualifying for the select Million Dollar Round Table) status. The year after, I sold enough to qualify for and achieve the MDRT status." (Chapter:1 A Chosen Profession)
- "The major reason – when my manager said, ‘You shut up and listen to me!’, he got my attention. That was the time I learnt a very important lesson – ‘Sometimes in life you’ve got to be unkind to be kind’. Leadership is not a popularity contest. He spoke to me as a parent and as a teacher. What a message!" (Chapter:1 A Chosen Profession)
- "All my life I kept failing and blaming the whole world for my failure, not realizing that I was my biggest problem. Nothing changed outside, but something changed inside me and gave me a new direction in life. Many times in life aren’t we our own biggest problem? That’s the time I learnt that selling is more a matter of will than skill and we need both. Between will and skill, will is more important than skill. Skill can be learnt, but when you are down and hurt, that’s the time when your sheer will is going to pull you up one more time, to get up and make one more call and that is the winning edge. Even though it has become a cliché, it still makes great sense. The difference between the ordinary and extraordinary is only the ‘extra’." (Chapter:1 A Chosen Profession)
- "At my seminars I ask participants, ‘How many have been to the horse races?’ Invariably hands go up. The winning horse that comes first, wins 3 to 1, 5 to 1 or 10 to 1, depending on the odds. The question is whether the horse that wins 10 to 1 is ten times faster than the one behind him? The answer is no. The winning horse may only be faster by the nose, but the rewards are ten times bigger. Is it fair? Who cares? What difference does it make? Those are the rules of the game. Whatever happens at the horse races is exactly true in our human life, too. The question is – do we have to be ten times smarter than our competition? The answer is No! All we need is the nose and the rewards are ten times bigger in real life too. The difference between winning and losing, many times, is very little. At the Olympics, the gold-medal winner beats those behind him by probably a fraction of a second. Michael Phelps created a world record by winning eight gold medals at the 2008 Olympics in Beijing, China. He won the 100-meter butterfly race by 1/100th of a second." (Chapter:1 A Chosen Profession)
- "The elite professional is like the cream that rises to the top, no matter how big or small the container." (Chapter:2 Who is Not Selling?)
- "Most people fail in life not because they lack talent, but because they lack a burning desire to succeed." (Chapter:2 Who is Not Selling?)
- "GOOD SALES PROFESSIONALS FIND A PROBLEM AND SOLVE IT. THEY UNCOVER A NEED AND FULFILL IT." (Chapter:3 Pride in the Profession of Selling)
- "Why do you go to a doctor ten miles away, bypassing many other doctors on the way? Is he the most qualified? Probably not. Why do you go to a mechanic ten miles away to get your car repaired, bypassing many other mechanics on the way? Is he the most qualified? Probably not! Something tells you that you are dealing with the right person. What is that ‘something’? That ‘something’ is called the ‘X’ factor. What is the ‘X’ factor? It is the feeling that I am dealing with the right person. That feeling is the trust factor. It is always the intangible spark, which connects us together." (Chapter:3 Pride in the Profession of Selling)
- "Selling is nothing but the transfer of enthusiasm from the seller to the buyer. " (Chapter:3 Pride in the Profession of Selling)
- "What this illustrates is that a good salesperson should have a strong belief in his product. Strong belief means that under the same set of circumstances, if the salesperson would not buy his own product, he certainly has no right to sell it to anyone." (Chapter:3 Pride in the Profession of Selling)
- "SELLING IS 90 PER CENT CONVICTION AND 10 PER CENT COMMUNICATION OF THE CONVICTION" (Chapter:3 Pride in the Profession of Selling)
- "‘You can never convince a client to buy a million dollar policy unless you own one. Supposing you died, how much insurance would your family need for food, clothing, shelter, children’s education, etc. in order to survive?’ I answered, ‘A million dollars.’ He asked me, ‘Then why don’t you own a million dollar policy yourself? If you don’t own it yourself, you have no right to sell it to anyone, because you have no conviction.’ It took me several months to convince myself, but the day I bought my own policy, I started selling policies of face values of close to $500,000 with as much comfort and ease as I used to sell $10,000 policies." (Chapter:3 Pride in the Profession of Selling)
- "LEARNING TO SELL IS LIKE LEARNING TO SWIM. THEY ARE BOTH LEARNT BY DOING, NOT BY READING A BOOK." (Chapter:4 Attitude Determines Success)
- "Winners turn a negative into a positive. Winners perform in spite of problems, not in absence of, and losers permanently rationalize and make excuses in life." (Chapter:4 Attitude Determines Success)
- "ABILITY TEACHES US HOW TO DO. MOTIVATION DECIDES WHY WE DO. ATTITUDE DETERMINES HOW WELL WE DO." (Chapter:4 Attitude Determines Success)
- "He put on his snow shoes, clad himself well to walk in the snowstorm and carried his vacuum cleaner. He knocked on his neighbor’s door and said, ‘Hello, I am John your neighbor. It’s a shame that we haven’t met earlier. We help families like yours live in a healthy environment. Would you mind if I came in and gave you a short demonstration?’ Nine out of ten invited him in and since they were not doing much and were indoors anyway, they said ‘Go ahead’. He then did his full demo without being rushed and since both partners were there, decision-making was easy. Just analyze the above scenario or approach:   1.He knocks on the door, he is outside and they are inside. A natural human tendency is that if there is a person standing outside your door, in a storm and especially if he is a neighbor, you ask him to come in. The entry was much easier and on favorable grounds. 2.His introduction was more of a neighbor than a salesman. 3.He said, ‘We help families like yours stay in a healthy environment’ – Who is not interested in living in a good healthy environment? If you analyze the words he said – he didn’t say I am from XYZ Company selling vacuum cleaners. 4.He takes permission to come in and do the demo. 5.Now, he demonstrates to them, letting them touch and feel the product. He shows them the advantage of owning a vacuum cleaner by actually using it to pull out hidden dirt from their carpets, curtains, mattresses, etc. that could be injurious to the health of the entire family. 6.He collects all the dirt in a bowl, hands the bowl to them and asks the question, ‘I am sure you would want your family to live in a healthy environment, wouldn’t you?’ The most obvious answer was Yes! In fact when they see the dirt, what is the first thing that comes to the prospect’s mind? How can we get rid of it and what does it cost? 7.Then of course, he answers objections in case there are any. 8.He finally ends up closing the sale. Persistent positive or negative thoughts act as a magnet to the outcome. Look at the above scenario – What an attitude! What an approach! What an opportunity! Was this person focused? Did he have a specific goal? Was he wandering aimlessly? Something crucial to remember – So long as you have your eyes on the goal, you don’t see obstacles. The moment you take your eyes off the goal, you start seeing obstacles." (Chapter:4 Attitude Determines Success)
- "The easiest way to overcome insecurity is to rise above mediocrity. Mediocrity has no power to move the soul. Mediocrity gives a mediocre living, a mediocre income and nothing beyond. Millions of people die in obscurity without any achievement in life. They are the ones who are halfhearted, who keep thinking, hoping and planning to do something but they never actually do anything. They are the ones that watch the world go by. They talk more and do less. They have only intentions and no action." (Chapter:4 Attitude Determines Success)
- "On closer analysis, one discovers that the top salespeople do not have any advantages such as higher education or power or a charming personality. Neither are they aggressive salespeople. What really separates a successful salesperson from a mediocre one are three important attributes:   Attitude  　 Mental toughness　 Ambition　 Burning desire with clarity of goals　 Action    　 Translating dreams into reality or potential into profits.　 " (Chapter:4 Attitude Determines Success)
- "If you study the lives of successful professionals who have achieved financial independence ethically, you will find they all have one thing in common – they are all positive thinkers and positive doers. There is a tremendous relationship between thinking and success or failure." (Chapter:4 Attitude Determines Success)
- " ‘Do you know the difference between winners and losers?’ Then he said something very profound, ‘Winners form the habit of doing things that losers don’t like to do. What are the things losers don’t like to do? Well, they are the same things winners don’t like to do either, but they do them anyway.’ Then he gave me an example. He said, ‘Losers don’t like to work hard. Winners don’t like to work hard either, but they work hard anyway. Losers don’t like to get up in the morning. Winners don’t like to get up in the morning either, but they get up anyway.’" (Chapter:4 Attitude Determines Success)
- "Discipline is doing what ought to be done, when it ought to be done, whether we like it or not. Life is like push and pull. Sometimes, we push ourselves and sometimes we have to pull ourselves, just like an automobile needs both the accelerator and the brake, one without the other will cause damage. Similarly an army without discipline is guaranteed to fail. Discipline is really the spirit that strengthens an army and gives courage and strength even to a small group to face big challenges." (Chapter:4 Attitude Determines Success)
- "NO MATTER HOW STRONG THE TEMPTETATION IS, ALWAYS STAY ON THE PATH OF INTEGRITY." (Chapter:5 Formula for Success)
- "a pat on the back and occasionally a kick on the bottom" (Chapter:5 Formula for Success)
- "I thought to myself that the same thing is true in human life too! Don’t we all go off-track some time in life and don’t we all need the auto-pilot to bring us back on track? What is the auto-pilot that brings humans back on track?   1.Values 2.Attitude 3.Ambition 4.Clarity of goals and purpose" (Chapter:5 Formula for Success)
- "Once a young man asked Socrates the secret to success. Socrates asked the young man to meet him at the riverside the next morning. They met. Socrates asked the young man to walk with him into the water and he did. Suddenly Socrates ducked the kid underwater and held him there till the kid started turning blue. Then, Socrates pulled him out. The first thing the kid did was to take a deep breath. Socrates asked him, ‘Son, when you were under water what did you want the most?’ The young man said, ‘Air.’ Socrates said, ‘Son, there is no secret to success. When you want success, as badly as you wanted air when you were in the water you will have it. Nobody will be able to stop you that day.’ This is called a burning desire. This is the difference between preferences and convictions in life; preferences are negotiable, convictions are not; and under pressure, preferences always become weak whereas convictions become stronger." (Chapter:5 Formula for Success)
- "As good sales professionals, our objective is to provide positive motivation to the prospect to purchase. Hence, not only should we show a benefit but also how we can prevent a loss, i.e. desire to succeed versus a desire not to fail. Both pain and pleasure can be strongly motivating. Those who are insecure often buy things that they cannot even afford, only to avoid the feeling of inferiority. Some buy expensive cars, jewels and paintings only for prestige reasons, whether they can afford it or not. They are satisfying a need that arises from inadequate self-esteem" (Chapter:5 Formula for Success)
- "FORMULA FOR SUCCESS 1.Be passionate about the profession of selling. 2.Believe in your product. 3.Believe in your company. 4.Believe in being a good professional by practicing integrity. 5.There is no substitute for hard work. 6.Practice persistence, don’t quit. 7.Be a possibility thinker. Always look at possibilities and potential. Be optimistic. 8.Be knowledgeable about your product, service and industry. 9.Get on a continuous education program. 10.Evaluate your performance, daily, weekly, monthly and with each evaluation, note three positive things you are doing and three things you need to improve until the next evaluation. Reinforce the positive and replace the negative. 11.Wise people learn from their mistakes but wiser people learn from others’ mistakes. 12.Be enthusiastic – it shows belief in your product and in your profession. 13.Empathize with your prospect. Put yourself in the other person’s shoes. 14.Become a high energy person. It shows you have a clear destination and the determination to achieve it. Avoid burnout. 15.Build high self-esteem and display self-confidence. 16.Don’t procrastinate. Learn and practice the phrase – ‘Do it now’. Don’t be an escapist. 17.Develop pride in performance. No matter what you do, do it with great pride. 18.Don’t do anything half heartedly. Let your work speak for you and when your work speaks for you, don’t interrupt. 19.Stand by your principles of integrity. Your credibility determines your profitability in life. Your goodwill is more than your money. 20.Do the right thing, the first time, every time. 21.Autograph you work with excellence." (Chapter:5 Formula for Success)
- "‘The quality of a person’s life is in direct proportion to their commitment to success, regardless of their chosen field of endeavor.’ – VINCE LOMBARDI" (Chapter:5 Formula for Success)
- "RECIPE FOR FAILURE Poor attitude + Poor values + Poor planning + Poor marketing + Poor selling + Poor service = Quickly out of business Poor planning + Poor marketing + GREAT SELLING + Poor service = Frustration + Burn out = Out of business Great planning + Great marketing + GREAT SELLING + Poor service = Frustration + Burn out = Out of business" (Chapter:5 Formula for Success)
- "IF YOU WANT TO CLOSE A SALE, SHOW THE BUYER THE REASON FOR AN URGENCY TO BUY, AND LOSS BECAUSE OF A DELAY.  " (Chapter:6 Qualities of a Winning Professional)
- "Edison said that ‘Success is 95 per cent perspiration and 5 per cent inspiration.’ What are the qualities of a winning professional? They are called the six Cs:   Character         　 Makes ethics a way of life.　 Courage           　 Is brave enough to continue despite setbacks.　 Conviction        　 Has belief in his product, profession and organization.　 Clarity               　 Has clear goals and a purpose in life.　 Competence     　 Has the skills and the will to sell.　 Communication　 Has persuasive skills and the ability to convince." (Chapter:6 Qualities of a Winning Professional)
- "They are the ones who ask relevant questions and listen carefully to identify the needs of the client and provide the right solution" (Chapter:6 Qualities of a Winning Professional)
- "Once, a wood cutter worked for a company for five years but never got a raise. The company hired a new person and within a year the new person got a raise. This caused resentment. The person who had been working there longer went to his supervisor and asked, ‘How come the new person got a raise and I didn’t, in the last five years?’ The supervisor said, ‘We are a result-oriented company. His output went up so he got a raise. If your output goes up you will also get a raise.’ So the man went back and he started hitting harder and putting in more hours but his output still didn’t go up. He thought to himself that maybe the new person knows something more than he does. He went and asked him ‘How come your output went up?’ The new man said, ‘After cutting every tree I take a break for two minutes and sharpen my axe. When was the last time you sharpened your axe?’ The wood cutter said ‘Oh! Oh! five years ago!’ This story explains it all. Continuous education is like sharpening your axe. Good professionals are always on a continuous education program in order to sharpen their axes. A person who can read but does not read is no better than the person who cannot read anyway." (Chapter:6 Qualities of a Winning Professional)
- "ALWAYS CLOSE THE TRANSACTION ON A POSITIVE NOTE.  " (Chapter:7 Pleasing Personality)
- "Everyone is a salesperson for their company or the country. A case in point – We have an office in Singapore. I gave a taxi driver a business card to take me to a particular address. When we arrived, the meter read $11. I pulled out $11 but he took only $10. I asked, ‘Henry, your meter reads $11. How come you are only taking $10?’ He replied, ‘Sir, as a taxi driver I am supposed to bring you straight to your destination. Since I didn’t know the last spot, I had to circle around the building. Had I brought you straight here, the meter would have read $10.’ What he said thereafter touched me the most. He said, ‘Legally, I can claim $11, but ethically I am entitled only to $10.’ He then added, ‘I am not a taxi driver; I am an ambassador of Singapore without a diplomatic passport.’ When a tourist comes into a country after clearing immigration and customs, the first person he usually meets is a taxi driver. If the first experience of the visitor with the taxi driver is unpleasant, the balance of the stay may not be very pleasant either. Quite often the tone is set from the outset. What this taxi driver was saying in unsaid words was very profound. ‘I am a diplomat of Singapore without a diplomatic passport.’ He demonstrated, through his actions, pride in himself, his profession and the nation. As far as I’m concerned, Henry could qualify to be a visiting faculty to give a lesson on ethics at any leading university in the world." (Chapter:7 Pleasing Personality)
- "The prospect starts making judgments based on those impressions, and accordingly feels comfortable or uncomfortable. Therefore, a good professional should reflect:   1.Confidence without arrogance. 2.Friendliness without being over-friendly. 3.Expertise without the ‘I know it all’ attitude." (Chapter:7 Pleasing Personality)
- "Once, a man, out of courtesy, opened the door for a woman as she walked in. She was rather strange and said, ‘Women are equal to men; hence you don’t need to hold the door for me just because I am a woman.’ The man replied, ‘I am not holding the door for you because you are a woman, I am holding the door because I am a gentleman.’" (Chapter:7 Pleasing Personality)
- "Establishing rapport means creating a positive impact or a favorable impression before you start your presentation. Don’t ever underestimate the power of courtesy and proper etiquette. Rapport-building is not the same as socializing or getting into long unrelated conversations. Some people think that the best way to establish rapport is to have a little social interaction and to try and find out some common areas of interest. I must say that common interests can certainly be helpful, but many a time, salespeople get carried away and overdo the socializing bit to the point of inconveniencing or irritating the prospect. Be careful with your socializing. If your prospect wants to talk of something other than business, make sure you don’t ignore him. Be courteous, answer and then ensure that you get back to your business discussion." (Chapter:7 Pleasing Personality)
- "Success is not measured by how high we go up in life, but how many times we bounce back after we fall down." (Chapter:8 Selling is a Rejection Business)
- "One should keep in mind that even the best salesperson in the world cannot sell to 100 per cent of his prospects and the worst salesperson may sell to one per cent by default. A sale made by default is not called selling, it is called peddling." (Chapter:8 Selling is a Rejection Business)
- "When I started in the insurance industry, my manager taught me ‘the law of averages’. During my training he told me that I would have to make about 150 calls in order to speak to about fifty decision-makers, with the others being unavailable for some reason or the other. If I spoke to fifty people, I would end up with twelve appointments to see prospects face-to-face, to whom I could make presentations to sell life insurance. These appointments were always made one week in advance. If I had twelve appointments lined up, two might get cancelled at the last minute and I would end up making ten presentations. If I made ten presentations and if I was an ineffective salesperson, I might sell one. If I was an average, I would end up selling two, but if I was good I might end up selling three or four and if I was excellent, I would sell five or six. The objective of the good salesperson is to raise their average from good to excellent and that’s what makes Michael Jordan or Sachin Tendulkar the superstars they are." (Chapter:8 Selling is a Rejection Business)
- "Negative emotions like fear and anger are internal battles that drain us of our energy. Fear of failure is worse than failure itself. In fact, it drags a person to failure. Self-doubt gives one a feeling of depression and uncertainty." (Chapter:8 Selling is a Rejection Business)
- "Failure leads to more failures because with every failure, a person’s self-esteem goes down and it becomes easy to fail the next time. Soon, this salesperson starts blaming the whole world for his failure. He blames his territory, bad prospects, bad manager, bad product, bad company, bad luck, etc., everything except himself. Negative people are driven and controlled by fear. The sad part is that most of the time the fear may be imaginary. Real fear ought to and can be addressed." (Chapter:8 Selling is a Rejection Business)
- "The straight and sure-shot path to self-respect and confidence is having integrity and honesty. Honesty is displayed when a person is in the habit of telling the truth. Unfair and unjust dealings carry a price tag that eventually has to be paid by the dishonest person. A good principle to live by is honesty and fairness to yourself and others in all dealings. Honesty is a virtue, not a policy. It is a way of life. Virtues represent purity and integrity of thoughts and actions. Therefore, a person who lives with honesty and integrity will always have high self-esteem and can consequently make an excellent career in sales." (Chapter:8 Selling is a Rejection Business)
- "Great achievers, whether a scientist or an artist, did not waste time waiting for an inspiration. They kept working anyway, just like most good professionals, who routinely continue to do what is required of them." (Chapter:8 Selling is a Rejection Business)
- "The sign of a good professional is that on a good day or a bad day, their output is identical. On good days, it comes easy, but on bad days it takes a lot of effort. They, however, don’t compromise on their quality and standards. This is called Mental Toughness." (Chapter:8 Selling is a Rejection Business)
- "From my insurance selling days, I remember one of the top producers in the company. When he made calls for prospecting, to him every ‘no’ was a time to celebrate. His attitude was: “I’m getting closer to my next ‘yes’” and he used to qualify for the million-dollar round table." (Chapter:8 Selling is a Rejection Business)
- "Self-image is the way we see ourselves and self-esteem is the way we feel about ourselves. " (Chapter:8 Selling is a Rejection Business)
- "Many successful people have a positive personality which is reflected in their self-confidence and the aura around them. They have a sense of self-respect coupled with humility. Our self-perception and behavior is instrumental in the way others perceive us. In fact, everybody wants to associate and deal with successful people. Our positive self-image makes us walk confidently and with energy, whereas a negative self-image makes us drag ourselves and our self-doubts are reflected in our behavior. Just as enthusiasm is contagious, so is lack of it. Your self-confidence gets transferred to the buyers and generates their confidence in you, your product and company." (Chapter:8 Selling is a Rejection Business)
- "A prospect also treats a sales professional who radiates confidence quite differently than one who seems unsure and insecure. The prospect can feel the vibes of self-confidence and this makes him feel that he must listen to the salesperson as he may have something important to say. Have you ever wondered why some people pay more attention to some salespeople and less to others? It is the sales professional’s overall personality that makes all the difference. What product you sell or company you represent becomes secondary." (Chapter:8 Selling is a Rejection Business)
- "Persistence is the ability to bounce back after every rejection. It is this ability that prevents a rejection from becoming dejection. However, being a Pest is when a salesperson becomes too pushy, starts nagging and irritating the prospect. He does not get the message that the buyer wants to be left alone. The ‘pest’ starts getting ignored. The prospect’s patience is exhausted and chances of retaliation become higher. So, be persistent but not a pest." (Chapter:8 Selling is a Rejection Business)
- "Experience shows that eighty per cent of the sales are made after the fifth call and that eighty per cent of the people quit before the fifth call. This is called ‘selling for your competitors’. The eighty per cent who quit have now prepared the ground and made the buyers ready to purchase. They have done the difficult work, but when the time comes to close the sale, they run out of steam and quit. Now, when the competitor calls and sees the client ready to purchase, they come and close the sale. You have actually made the sale for your competitors. ‘You have damaged your own sale, by not being persistent.’" (Chapter:8 Selling is a Rejection Business)
- "We must understand the difference between will-power and won’t-power. Will-power is persistence, won’t-power is obstinacy. Whenever there is a tussle between water and a rock, eventually water wins. The water wears down the rock." (Chapter:8 Selling is a Rejection Business)
- "Everyone wants to win in life but very few people are willing to pay the price to prepare to win. Only those who care to do little things carefully and with pride are the ones who perform well. That is when a salesperson’s career can sky-rocket." (Chapter:8 Selling is a Rejection Business)
- "‘Winning is not a sometime thing; it’s an all time thing. You don’t win once in a while, you don’t do things right once in a while, you do them right all the time. Winning is a habit. Unfortunately, so is losing.’ – VINCE LOMBARDI" (Chapter:8 Selling is a Rejection Business)
- "‘God, don’t lighten my burden in life, just give me stronger shoulders.’ " (Chapter:8 Selling is a Rejection Business)
- "Winners focus their strength on winning. Losers focus their strength only on what they can get by with. Selling is an inner game. Eighty per cent of selling is the result of self-esteem, self-image and mental conditioning, and only twenty per cent is selling skills. The way you think and feel about yourself gets communicated to others. If you feel good about yourself, your product and your company, it gets communicated non-verbally to the other person. If you think and believe that you are a person of integrity, that too gets communicated nonverbally. This is the process of mental conditioning." (Chapter:8 Selling is a Rejection Business)
- "Mental conditioning is done through a process of autosuggestion and visualization. It is a process used by some of the top sportsmen and athletes in the world. Visualization is a process of forming a mental picture. Mental pictures trigger emotions and feelings. It means that good pictures create good feelings, positive pictures create positive feelings. Pictures of success translate into success in life." (Chapter:8 Selling is a Rejection Business)
- "If you want to see results, auto-suggestions must be accompanied with visualization. If you practice autosuggestions mechanically without visualizing, you will not see results. " (Chapter:8 Selling is a Rejection Business)
- "– ‘If you keep doing what you have always been doing, you will keep getting what you have always been getting.’ Expecting different results is defined as insanity. If we expect different results then it stands to reason that we need to change the input because input determines output. Positive auto-suggestions and visualizations are a process of internalizing positive behavior, which in turn conditions us for success." (Chapter:8 Selling is a Rejection Business)
- "It is a funny thing about life; if you refuse to accept anything but the best, you very often get it.’ " (Chapter:8 Selling is a Rejection Business)
- "ONE SHOULD AWAYS TAKE A FARSIGHTED VIEW LIKE THE JAPANESE. TO THEM, LONG-TERM RELATIONSHIPS ARE MORE IMPORTANT THAN THE TRANSACTIONS." (Chapter:9 Transactional versus Relationship Selling)
- "There is the story of a very successful car salesman, John, who had an old client come up to him in his showroom. John greeted him warmly and said, ‘I haven’t seen you in a long time. How have you been? Where have you been?’ The client said, ‘I have been in town. It’s just that I didn’t need to buy a new car so I didn’t stop by.’ John said, ‘Well, I thought we were friends and you don’t have to buy a car every time you come here. It is nice to see you once in a while.’ Is it any coincidence that he was amongst the top salespeople in his company?" (Chapter:9 Transactional versus Relationship Selling)
- "A ‘Strategic Partnership’ is one where both parties feel that each one is critical to the other one’s long-term success, and they will work towards helping each other’s growth." (Chapter:9 Transactional versus Relationship Selling)
- "Quality service is not an obligation but a responsibility. It is what makes the buyer feel good and it is the experience of feeling good that keeps bringing him back to us. This is known as the ‘feel-good factor’. The feel-good factor, unless backed by performance and substance, doesn’t last too long. When performance is missing, the pleasantness is hypocritical and trust transforms into suspicion." (Chapter:9 Transactional versus Relationship Selling)
