---
title: "Book Notes: The Physics of Wall Street - James Owen Weatherall"
date: "2018-03-06"
categories: 
  - "research"
---

- " Bachelier had laid out the mathematics of financial markets. Samuelson’s first thought was that his own work on the subject over the past several years — the work that was supposed to form one of his students’ dissertation — had lost its claim to originality. But it was more striking even than that. By 1900, this Bachelier character had apparently worked out much of the mathematics that Samuelson and his students were only now adapting for use in economics — mathematics that Samuelson thought had been developed far more recently, by mathematicians whose names Samuelson knew by heart because they were tied to the concepts they had supposedly invented. Weiner processes. Kolmogorov’s equations. Doob’s martingales. Samuelson thought this was cutting-edge stuff, twenty years old at the most. But there it all was, in Bachelier’s thesis. How come Samuelson had never heard of him?" (Chapter:1 Primordial Seeds)
- "weaves his way back to his hotel" (Chapter:1 Primordial Seeds)
- "But if this reasoning is right, Bachelier argued, then stock prices must be random. Think of what happens when a trade is executed at a given price. This is where the rubber hits the road for a market. A trade means that two people — a buyer and a seller — were able to agree on a price. Both buyer and seller have looked at the available information and have decided how much they think the stock is worth to them, but with an important caveat: the buyer, at least according to Bachelier’s logic, is buying the stock at that price because he or she thinks that in the future the price is likely to go up. The seller, meanwhile, is selling at that price because he or she thinks the price is more likely to go down. " (Chapter:1 Primordial Seeds)
- "Some economists, particularly members of the so-called Chicago School, cling to it as an essential and irrefutable truth. But you don’t have to think too hard to realize it’s a little fishy. For instance, one consequence of the hypothesis is that there can’t be any speculative bubbles, because a bubble can occur only if the market price for something becomes unmoored from the thing’s actual value. " (Chapter:1 Primordial Seeds)
- "A good analogy is high school physics, which often takes place in a world with no friction and no gravity. Of course, there’s no such world. But a few simplifying assumptions can go a long way toward making an otherwise intractable problem solvable — and once you solve the simplified problem, you can begin to ask how much damage your simplifying assumptions do. " (Chapter:1 Primordial Seeds)
- "Samuelson met Wilson while still a graduate student. At the time, Wilson was a professor of “vital statistics” at the Harvard School of Public Health, but he had spent the first twenty years of his career as a physicist and engineer at MIT. Wilson had been the last student of J. W. Gibbs, the first great American mathematical physicist — indeed, the first recipient of an American PhD in engineering, in 1863 from Yale. Gibbs is most famous for having helped lay the foundations of thermodynamics and statistical mechanics, which attempt to explain the behavior of ordinary objects like tubs of water and car engines in terms of their microscopic parts." (Chapter:1 Primordial Seeds)
- "(Samuelson was the second Nobelist in economics; Tinbergen was the first.)" (Chapter:1 Primordial Seeds)
- "Tinbergen famously argued that a company would become less productive if the income of the highest-paid employee was more than five times the income of the lowest-paid employee — a rule of thumb largely forgotten today." (Chapter:1 Primordial Seeds)
- "Unlike in physics, where one often works with full-blown theories, mathematical economics deals almost exclusively with models." (Chapter:1 Primordial Seeds)
- "Bachelier’s answer was built on the idea of a fair bet. A bet is considered fair, in probability theory, if the average outcome for both people involved in the bet is zero. This means that, on average, over many repeated bets, both players should break even. An unfair bet, meanwhile, is when one player is expected to lose money in the long run. " (Chapter:1 Primordial Seeds)
- "There’s an important point to emphasize here. One often hears that markets are unpredictable because they are random. There is a sense in which this is right, and Bachelier knew it. Bachelier’s random walk model indicates that you can’t predict whether a given stock is going to go up or down, or whether your portfolio will profit. But there’s another sense in which some features of markets are predictable precisely because they are random. It’s because markets are random that you can use Bachelier’s model to make probabilistic predictions, which, because of the law of large numbers — the mathematical result that Bernoulli discovered, linking probabilities with frequency — give you information about how markets will behave in the long run. " (Chapter:1 Primordial Seeds)
- "An event that occurred toward the end of Bachelier’s career, in 1926 (the year before he finally earned his permanent position), cast a pall over his final years as a teacher and may explain why he stopped publishing. That year, Bachelier applied for a permanent position at Dijon, where he had been teaching for several years. One of his colleagues, in reviewing his work, became confused by Bachelier’s notation. Believing he had found an error, he sent the document to Paul Lévy, a younger but more famous French probability theorist. Lévy, examining only the page on which the error purportedly appeared, confirmed the Dijon mathematician’s suspicions. Bachelier was blacklisted from Dijon. Later, he learned of Lévy’s part in the fiasco and became enraged. He circulated a letter claiming that Lévy had intentionally blocked his career without understanding his work. Bachelier earned his position at Besançon a year later, but the damage had been done and questions concerning the legitimacy of much of Bachelier’s work remained. Ironically, in 1941, Lévy read Bachelier’s final paper. The topic was Brownian motion, which Lévy was also working on. Lévy found the paper excellent. He corresponded with Bachelier, returned to Bachelier’s earlier work, and discovered that he, not Bachelier, had been wrong about the original point — Bachelier’s notation and informal style had made the paper difficult to follow, but it was essentially correct. Lévy wrote to Bachelier and they reconciled, probably sometime in 1942." (Chapter:1 Primordial Seeds)
- "Second, Du Pont developed all of the stages of manufacturing of the polymer in parallel. That is, instead of waiting until the team fully understood the first stage of the process (say, the chemical reaction by which the polymer was actually produced) and only then moving on to the next step (say, developing a method for spinning the polymer into a fiber), teams worked on all of these problems at once, each team taking the others’ work as a “black box” that would produce a fixed output by some not-yet-known method." (Chapter:2 Swimming Upstream)
- "The central problem was that the physicists significantly underestimated the role engineers would have to play in constructing the site. They argued that Du Pont was putting up unnecessary barriers to research by focusing on process and organization. Ironically, this problem was solved by giving the physicists more power over engineering: Compton negotiated with Du Pont to let the Chicago physicists review and sign off on the Du Pont engineers’ blueprints. But once the physicists saw the sheer scale of the project and began to understand just how complex the engineering was going to be, many gained an appreciation of the engineers’ role — and some even got interested in the more difficult problems." (Chapter:2 Swimming Upstream)
- "You might notice that the argument in the last paragraph, which is just the argument Osborne gave in “Brownian Motion in the Stock Market,” has a slightly surprising feature: it says that we should be interested in the logarithms of prices because logarithms of prices better reflect how investors feel about their gains and losses. In other words, it’s not the objective value of the change in a stock price that matters, it’s how an investor reacts to the price change. In fact, Osborne’s motivation for choosing logarithms of price as his primary variable was a psychological principle known as the Weber-Fechner law. The Weber-Fechner law was developed by nineteenth-century psychologists Ernst Weber and Gustav Fechner to explain how subjects react to different physical stimuli. In a series of experiments, Weber asked blindfolded men to hold weights. He would gradually add more weight to the weights the men were already holding, and the men were supposed to say when they felt an increase. It turned out that if a subject started out holding a small weight — just a few grams — he could tell when a few more grams were added. But if the subject started out with a larger weight, a few more grams wouldn’t be noticed. It turned out that the smallest noticeable change was proportional to the starting weight. In other words, the psychological effect of a change in stimulus isn’t determined by the absolute magnitude of the change, but rather by its change relative to the starting point." (Chapter:2 Swimming Upstream)
- "But Osborne took no heed of such things. When he understood something, he understood it, and no amount of reputation or authority could intimidate him. So Osborne wrote Einstein a letter in which he very politely suggested that Einstein’s argument didn’t make any sense. Einstein replied by restating his argument from the book. So Osborne wrote again. Einstein conceded that his argument was problematic but thought the conclusion remained sound, and so he offered another argument. Once again, Osborne refuted it. At the end of a half-dozen-letter correspondence, it was clear that Einstein was unconvinced by Osborne. But it was equally clear to Osborne that Einstein’s argument in the book failed, and that he didn’t have any other good arguments up his sleeve.\* \[\*I think most physicists today, if they read the letters, would say that Osborne got the better of the exchange.\]" (Chapter:2 Swimming Upstream)
- "Osborne approached his work in economics in the same spirit. Unconcerned about his lack of background in economics or finance, Osborne presented his research with an engineer’s confidence. He published “Brownian Motion in the Stock Market” in a journal called Operations Research. It was not an economics journal, but enough economists and economically minded mathematicians read it that Osborne’s research quickly garnered attention." (Chapter:2 Swimming Upstream)
- "The work on migratory salmon bears a surprising connection to Osborne’s work on financial markets. His model of how salmon swim upriver included analysis at several different time scales. There were effects corresponding to how well the salmon were able to swim over short distances, which depended on things like the strength of the current in the river at a given moment. There were also effects that you couldn’t see clearly just by looking at a salmon swimming for a few feet or yards but became apparent when you looked at a salmon traveling over, say, a thousand miles. The first kind of effect might be called “fast” fluctuations in the salmon’s efficiency; the second might be called “slow” fluctuations. The trouble was that the data were much better on the slow fluctuations. It’s easy to record how many salmon, roughly, have reached a given point at a given time; it is much harder to record just how well any given salmon is making headway as a river’s current changes. Osborne had worked out a theoretical model that tried to explain both the slow and fast fluctuations, and to show how they related to each other. And he wanted to figure out a way to test the model. Getting better data on individual salmon would have been one way to do this — but it would have been difficult, and Osborne didn’t have any idea where to start. A second possibility was to find another system that might show both the fast and slow fluctuations that Osborne wanted to study, to see if the same model described that system as well. This second option seemed much more appealing, but Osborne needed an appropriate system. When he sat down to figure out how to understand the stock quotes in the Wall Street Journal, he soon realized that markets, too, have different scales of fluctuations. Some market forces, like the details of how an exchange works or the interactions of traders, can affect how prices change over the course of a day. These are like the fast fluctuations that salmon experience from one river bend to the next. But there are other forces affecting markets, things like business cycles and government interest rates, that become apparent only when you step back and look at a longer time period. These are slow fluctuations. It turned out the financial world was the perfect place to look for data that could be used to test Osborne’s ideas about how these different kinds of fluctuations affect one another." (Chapter:2 Swimming Upstream)
- "The process worked in the other direction, too. After developing the migratory salmon model in the context of stock market prices, and after tweaking the model to better fit the data he had used to test it, he applied it to a problem in physics. Osborne proposed a new model for deep ocean currents. Specifically, he was able to explain how the random motion of water molecules (fast fluctuations in the language of the salmon paper) could give rise to variations in apparently systematic large-scale phenomena, like currents (slow fluctuations). For Osborne, work in physics and finance were intrinsically linked." (Chapter:2 Swimming Upstream)
- "unrelieved bedlam" (Chapter:2 Swimming Upstream)
- "In the mid-sixties, Osborne and a collaborator showed that at any instant, the chances that a stock will go up are not necessarily the same as the chances that the stock will go down. This assumption, you’ll recall, was an essential part of the Brownian motion model, where a step in one direction is assumed to be just as likely as a step in the other. Osborne showed that if a stock went up a little bit, its next motion was much more likely to be a move back down than another move up. Likewise, if a stock went down, it was much more likely to go up in value in its next change. That is, from moment to moment the market is much more likely to reverse itself than to continue on a trend. But there was another side to this coin. If a stock moved in the same direction twice, it was much more likely to continue in that direction than if it had moved in a given direction only once. Osborne argued that the infrastructure of the trading floor was responsible for this kind of non-randomness, and Osborne went on to suggest a model for how prices change that took this kind of behavior into account." (Chapter:2 Swimming Upstream)
- "Not everyone who has worked with mathematical models in finance has been as sensitive to the importance of this methodology as Osborne was, which is one of the principal reasons why mathematical models have sometimes been associated with financial ruin. If you continue to trade based on a model whose assumptions have ceased to be met by the market, and you lose money, it is hardly a failure of the model. It’s like attaching a car engine to a plane and being disappointed when it doesn’t fly." (Chapter:2 Swimming Upstream)
- "Osborne noticed that a great preponderance of ordinary investors placed their orders at whole-number prices — $10, or $11 say. But stocks were valued in units of 1/8 of a dollar. This meant that a trader could look at his book and see that there were a lot of people who wanted to buy a stock at, say, $10. He could then buy it at $10 1/8, knowing that at the end of the day the stock wouldn’t drop below $10 because there were so many people willing to buy at that threshold. So at worst, the trader would lose $1/8; at best, the stock would go up, and he could make a lot. Conversely, he could see that a lot of people wanted to sell at, say, $11, and so he could sell at $10 7/8 with confidence that the most he could lose would be $1/8 if the stock went up instead of down. This meant that if you went through a day’s trades and looked for trades at $1/8 above or below whole-dollar amounts, you could gather which stocks the experts thought were “hot” because so many other people were interested." (Chapter:2 Swimming Upstream)
- " Szolem must have hoped his dramatic gesture would knock some sense into his young nephew. But the plan backfired magnificently. Benoît took the paper — a review of a recent book by a Harvard linguist named George Kingsley Zipf — and studied it carefully on his way home. Zipf was a famously eccentric character and few took him seriously. He had spent his career arguing for a universal law of physical, social, and linguistic phenomena. Zipf’s law said that if you constructed a list of all the things in some natural category, say, all of the cities in France, or all of the libraries in the world, and ranked them according to their size — you might rank cities by population; libraries, by collection size — you would always find that the size of each thing on the list was related to its rank on the list. In particular, the second thing on each list would always be about half the size of the first thing, the third thing on the list would be about a third the size of the first thing, and so on. The review that Benoît read focused on a particular example of the law in action: Zipf had gone through and counted how often various words appeared in various texts. He then showed that if you ordered the words by how often they appeared in a piece of writing, you usually found that the most common word appeared about twice as often as the second most common word, three times as often as the third most common word, and so on for all of the words in the document." (Chapter:3 From Coastlines to Cotton Prices)
- "Though a difficult decision at the time, the move to Paris almost certainly bought the Mandelbrots their lives: of the more than 3 million Jews who lived in Poland before World War II, only a few hundred thousand survived the Holocaust." (Chapter:3 From Coastlines to Cotton Prices)
- "But not a very good one. A coastline is hardly a straight line. The coast of Britain dips in at the Bristol Channel and the Irish Sea, jutting out again near Wales, so taking one very long ruler isn’t going to give an accurate measurement. To get a better measurement, you would want to use a somewhat smaller ruler — one that could easily accommodate the additional length that the various peninsulas and bays add to the coast. You might try adding up the distances from, say, Penzance to Bristol, and then from Bristol to St. David’s in Wales, and then from St. David’s to Carmel Head at the northwestern tip of Wales, and so on all the way up the coast. This total distance would be a lot longer than the first distance you calculated, but it would be more accurate. Now, though, a pattern begins to emerge. This smaller ruler, it turns out, underestimates the length in the same way the original long ruler did. Using the smaller ruler, you miss Cardigan Bay altogether, not to mention the dozens of smaller harbors and inlets along the Cornish and Welsh coasts. To account for these features, which turn out to add rather a lot of distance, you need a smaller ruler still. But again, the same problem arises. In fact, no matter what size ruler you pick, the answer you get by measuring the coastline with that ruler is always too small. In other words, you can always get a larger answer to the question by picking a smaller ruler. This is where the paradox arises. It is often the case that choosing more precise instruments gives you a better measurement of something. You can get a sense of how hot a pot of water is by sticking your finger in it. An alcohol thermometer would do the job even better, and a high-tech digital thermometer would bring the accuracy to within a fraction of a degree. There is a sense in which the imprecise tools are adding measurement error, and as you devise better and better instruments, you home in on the real temperature. But with a coastline, no matter how precise your measuring device — that is, no matter how small your ruler — your measurement is always much too small. In some sense, a coastline doesn’t have a length, or at least not in the way that simple shapes like a line or a circle do." (Chapter:3 From Coastlines to Cotton Prices)
- "Mandelbrot addressed the coastline paradox in a groundbreaking paper in 1967. It was one of his first attempts to describe a fractal shape — as, indeed, a coastline turns out to be, though Mandelbrot didn’t coin the term until 1975. Coastlines (and other fractals) are remarkable from a mathematical point of view because they have a property called self-similarity. To say that something is self-similar is to say that it is composed of pieces that look just like the whole; these pieces in turn are composed of still smaller pieces that also look like the whole, and so on ad infinitum. If you begin with the whole west coast of Britain and carve it up into several pieces, you will notice that each of these also looks like a coastline; just like the full coastline, the smaller stretches of coast have their own little inlets and peninsulas. And if you break up one of these smaller bits of coast further, the still-smaller pieces exhibit all the same features of the larger structures." (Chapter:3 From Coastlines to Cotton Prices)
- "Yet mathematically, this sort of randomness is mild. The V-2 rockets were fired systematically, several a day, aimed roughly at London. Working out the odds of how many rockets would land on St. Paul’s Cathedral or in Hammersmith was a lot like working out how many times a roulette ball would fall into red 25. Indeed, many of the situations we think of as random are like this. So many, in fact, that it’s easy to fall prey to the idea that all random events are like coin tosses or simple casino games. This assumption underlies much of modern financial theory. Think back to when Bachelier was imagining how stock prices would change over time if they underwent a random walk. Every few moments, the price would tick up or down by some small amount as though God were flipping a coin. Bachelier discovered that if this was a good approximation of what was happening, the distribution of prices would look like a bell curve, a normal distribution. Osborne of course pointed out that this wasn’t quite right; really, you expect the prices to change by some fixed percentage each time God flips his coin, rather than some fixed amount. This modification led to the observations that rates of return should be normally distributed and prices should be log-normally distributed." (Chapter:3 From Coastlines to Cotton Prices)
- "For all the diversity of his data sources, Pareto found a single pattern over and over again. As he described it, 80% of the wealth in any country, in any era, is controlled by 20% of the population. The pattern is now known as Pareto’s principle, or sometimes the 80–20 rule. At the time, Pareto interpreted these results much as Zipf would have, as evidence for a “social law” revealing that wealth is not distributed randomly but rather by some mysterious force that shapes markets and societies. Once Pareto began looking, the law seemed to apply to everything. Eighty percent of a company’s sales are usually due to just 20% of its customers. Eighty percent of crimes can be traced to just 20% of criminals. And so on. (Nowadays, Pareto’s principle is seen to hold approximately in many places, such as in the ratio of health-care costs to patients in the United States.)" (Chapter:3 From Coastlines to Cotton Prices)
- "After another awkward attempt or two, Mandelbrot realized that something was wrong. He backed up and pointed to the graph on the board. “Isn’t that a wealth distribution plot?” Puzzled, Houthakker explained that the drawing on his board had been from a meeting with a graduate student earlier in the day, during which Houthakker and the student were discussing historical data on cotton prices. The picture was a graph of daily returns from cotton markets. Houthakker went on to explain that he had been working on cotton markets for a while now, but the data weren’t cooperating with theory. By this time, Bachelier’s work had been rediscovered and economists had begun to accept that markets undergo a random walk, as Bachelier and Osborne had argued. Houthakker was interested in verifying this hypothesis by looking at historical data. If the random walk thesis was correct, you should see many small price changes over the course of a day or a week or a month, but very few large ones. What Houthakker’s data showed, however, was not what the theory predicted: he was seeing too many very small changes, but also far too many very large ones. Worse, he was struggling to come up with a value for the average price change, as Bachelier’s theory predicted must exist. Every time Houthakker looked at a new set of data, the average would change, often dramatically. In other words, cotton prices seemed to behave more like a drunken firing squad than a drunken vacationer." (Chapter:3 From Coastlines to Cotton Prices)
- "Lévy’s work on random processes had led him to study a class of probability distribution now called Lévy-stable distributions. The normal and Cauchy distributions are both examples of Lévy-stable distributions, but Lévy showed that there is a spectrum of randomness, ranging between the two. (In fact, there are even wilder varieties of randomness than the Cauchy distribution.) Wildness can be captured by a number, usually called alpha, that characterizes the tails of a Lévy-stable distribution (see Figure 4). Normal distributions have an alpha of 2; Cauchy distributions have an alpha of 1. The lower the number, the more wildly random the process (and the fatter the tails). Distributions that have alpha of 1 or less don’t satisfy the law of large numbers — in fact, it isn’t possible to even define the average value for a quantity that wild. Distributions with alpha between 1 and 2, meanwhile, have average values, but they don’t have a well-defined average variability — what statisticians call volatility or variance — which means it can be very hard to calculate an average value from empirical data, even when the average exists." (Chapter:3 From Coastlines to Cotton Prices)
- ". In this case, once you have established that stock market prices are random (at least in some sense), the next step is to assume that they are random in the simplest possible way: that they just follow a random walk. This is what Bachelier did. Osborne then pointed out that this couldn’t be right, since it would mean that stock prices could become negative, and so he complicated the model ever so slightly by suggesting that market rates of return follow a random walk. He then showed that this suggestion explained the data much better than Bachelier’s model. Then came Mandelbrot, who said that Osborne’s suggestion wasn’t quite right either, because if you looked at price data in detail, you would see a different pattern from the one Osborne thought he had found. Not dramatically different, though; the pattern Mandelbrot identified doesn’t say that prices aren’t random, but that prices are random in a slightly different way from what Osborne had believed. The differences between Osborne’s model and Mandelbrot’s can hardly be dismissed, but they become important only in the context of extreme events. On a typical day, there aren’t going to be any extreme events (according to either theory), and so you usually won’t notice much of a difference between the two models." (Chapter:3 From Coastlines to Cotton Prices)
- "instinct for thrift and financial savvy" (Chapter:4 Beating the Dealer)
- "Shannon concluded that the amount of information carried by a signal has something to do with how easy it is for the receiver to decode, or in other words, on how unpredictable the signal is. Your rant on traffic doesn’t contain much information — it’s easy to predict; your film synopsis contains more. This is the essence of Shannon’s information theory." (Chapter:4 Beating the Dealer)
- "Perhaps the easiest way to see why this way of looking at information makes sense is to turn Shannon’s picture around. Information is the kind of thing that takes you from feeling not so sure about something to feeling more sure about it. If you gain information, you learn something about the world. Now imagine two cases. Suppose you begin by thinking that the Yankees have a great chance of winning half their games in any given year, but that there’s very little chance that there are aliens living on the moon. Shannon’s essential insight could be put as follows: if you were to learn, as in become absolutely certain, that there are aliens living on the moon, you would have gained a lot more information than if you were to learn that the Yankees have won more than half their games this year. The reason? In Shannon’s terms, it’s that the probability of there being aliens on the moon is much, much lower than that of the Yankees (or any other team) winning half their games. This connection between the probability of a message and the information contained in the message provides the crucial link needed to quantify information. In other words, by connecting information with probability, Shannon discovered a way to assign a number to a message that measures the amount of information it contains, which in turn was the first major step in building a mathematical theory of information." (Chapter:4 Beating the Dealer)
- "The point is that if your strategy depends on the probabilities of getting different card combinations, and if you’re being careful, you need to take into account what cards have already been played. Adopting such a strategy, where you keep track of what cards have already been played and vary your strategy accordingly, is called card counting." (Chapter:4 Beating the Dealer)
- "One strategy would be to try to make bets in a way that maximizes the amount of money you could stand to make. The best way to do this would be to bet everything in your pocket each time. Then, if you win, you double your money on each flip. But this strategy has a big problem: the coin being weighted means that you will usually win, not that you’ll always win. And if you bet everything on each flip, you’ll lose everything the first time it comes up tails. So even though you were trying to make as much money as possible, the chances that you’ll end up broke are quite high (in fact, you’re essentially guaranteed to go broke in the long run), with no chance to make your money back. This scenario — where your available funds run out, and you’re forced to accept your losses — is known as “gambler’s ruin.”" (Chapter:4 Beating the Dealer)
- " If the messages you were receiving over your private wire service were perfectly reliable, you’d be wise to bet everything, since you’re guaranteed to win. But Kelly was more interested in a slightly different case. What happens if you have someone send you correct racing results, but there’s noise on the line? If the message that comes along is so garbled that you can’t make out much of anything, your default guess is going to be that Valentine is going to win, since that’s what the odds were to begin with and you haven’t received any new information. If it’s garbled but you’re pretty sure you heard a t sound, you’ve gotten some information — you have good reason to think Paul Revere didn’t win, since there’s no t in his name. If pressed, you would probably guess that your contact said “Valentine,” because that’s the more likely message, but you can’t know for sure. You wouldn’t want to put all of your money on one horse, because you still have a chance of losing. But you can rule out one possibility, which gives you an advantage: you now know that the bookie thinks Valentine’s and Epitaph’s chances aren’t as good as they really are, because the bookie is assuming Paul Revere has an 18% chance of winning. So if you make a combined bet on both Valentine and Epitaph in the right proportions, you’re guaranteed to win one of them for a net profit. Hence even the partial information is enough to help you decide what bets to place." (Chapter:4 Beating the Dealer)
- "Kelly worked out the solution to this problem, provided you want to maximize the long-term growth of the money you start with. As in the example above, where you could make out a t sound but nothing else, partial information can be sufficient to give you an advantage over a bookie who is setting odds without any information about how the race turned out. The advantage can be calculated by multiplying the payout — the number b when someone gives you b-to-1 odds — by what you believe is the true probability of winning (based on your partial information), and then subtracting the probability of losing (again, based on your partial information). To figure out how much of your starting money to bet, as a fraction of what you have, you divide your advantage by the payout. This gives the equation now called the Kelly criterion or Kelly bet size. The percentage of your money to bet on any given outcome is advantage ————— payout If your advantage is zero (or negative!), Kelly says not to bet at all; otherwise, bet the fraction of your wealth given by the Kelly criterion. If you always follow this rule, you will be guaranteed to outperform anyone adopting another betting strategy (such as betting it all or betting nothing). One of the most surprising things in Kelly’s paper, something that feels almost mystical, is a proof of what will happen if you follow his rule in a scenario like the horse-betting story, where you have a stream of (partial) information coming in: if you always use the Kelly criterion, under certain ideal circumstances your wealth will increase at exactly the rate that information comes in along the line. Information is money." (Chapter:4 Beating the Dealer)
- "You can virtually always buy a stock; but you can sell a stock only if you already own it. So you can bet against a stock only if you’ve already chosen to bet for it. " (Chapter:4 Beating the Dealer)
- "Views on short selling changed in the 1970s and 1980s, in part because of Thorp’s and others’ work, and in part because of the rise of the Chicago School of economics. As those economists argued at the time, short selling may seem crude, but it serves a crucial social good: it helps keep markets efficient. If the only people who can sell a stock are the ones who already own it, people who have information that could be bad for the company often don’t have any way of affecting market prices. This would mean that information could be available that isn’t reflected in the stock price, because the people who have access to the information aren’t able to participate in the market. Short selling prevents this situation." (Chapter:4 Beating the Dealer)
- "Here, though, Thorp had one of his most creative insights. His analysis of warrant pricing gave him a way of relating warrant prices to stock prices. Using this relationship, he realized that if you sell warrants short, but at the same time you buy some shares of the underlying stock, you can protect yourself against the warrant increasing in value — because if the warrant increases in value, according to Thorp’s calculations the stock price should also increase, limiting your losses on the warrant. Thorp discovered that if you pick the right mix of warrants and stocks, you can guarantee a profit unless the stock price moves dramatically. This strategy is now called delta hedging, and it has spawned other strategies involving other “convertible” securities (securities that, like options, can be exchanged for another security, such as certain bonds or preferred shares of stock that can be converted to shares of common stock). Using such strategies, Thorp was able to consistently make 20% per year . . . for about forty-five years. He’s still doing it — indeed, 2008 was one of his worst years ever, and he made 18%. In 1967, he wrote a book, called Beat the Market, with a colleague at UC Irvine who had worked on similar ideas." (Chapter:4 Beating the Dealer)
- "The essential insight was that at any given instant, it is always possible to create a portfolio consisting of a stock and an option on that stock that would be perfectly risk-free. If this sounds familiar, it’s because the idea is very similar to the one at the heart of Thorp’s delta hedging strategy: he, too, realized that if the prices of options and their underlying assets are related, you could combine options and stocks to control risk. The difference was that Thorp’s delta hedge strategy aimed to guarantee a profit, provided that the underlying stock’s price didn’t change too dramatically. This approach controlled risk, but it didn’t eliminate it altogether. (Indeed, if CAPM-style reasoning is correct, you shouldn’t be able to both eliminate risk and still make a substantial profit.) Black’s approach was to find a portfolio consisting of stocks and options that was risk-free, and then argue by CAPM reasoning that this portfolio should be expected to earn the risk-free rate of return. Black’s strategy of building a risk-free asset from stocks and options is now called dynamic hedging." (Chapter:5 Physics Hits the Street)
- "Physics had been on the rise in the United States since World War II. But after Sputnik was launched, physics interest skyrocketed. About five hundred physics PhDs were awarded in 1958. By 1965, that number was closer to a thousand, and by 1969 it was over fifteen hundred. This rapid growth was in part a matter of nationalism: becoming a rocket scientist was a fine way to serve your country. But even more, it was a matter of funding. NASA’s annual budget increased by a factor of seventy from 1958 to its peak in the mid-sixties. In 1966, NASA was given almost $6 billion — 4.5% of the total federal budget — to devote to basic science. Other government funding agencies, like the Department of Energy and the National Science Foundation, were also flush (though none could compete with NASA). Even mediocre graduates of mid-tier doctoral programs were guaranteed jobs in science, as either professors or government researchers. Physicists were in high demand." (Chapter:5 Physics Hits the Street)
- "As the seventies droned on, the number of physics PhDs awarded in the United States dropped, to about one thousand per year. While this was significantly lower than the peak in 1968, it was still far more than the flailing job market could support. This meant that by the time Black moved to Goldman Sachs, in 1983, there were thousands of very talented men and women with graduate degrees in physics and related fields who were either unemployed or underemployed." (Chapter:5 Physics Hits the Street)
- "Mandelbrot left finance at the end of the 1960s, but he returned in the early 1990s. One of the reasons was that many financial practitioners were beginning to recognize the shortcomings of the Black-Scholes model. Instrumental in this shift was the Black Monday stock market crash of 1987, during which world financial markets fell more than 20% literally overnight. Blame for the crash fell to a novel financial product based on options and the Black-Scholes model, known as portfolio insurance. Portfolio insurance was designed, and advertised, to curtail the risk of major losses. It was a kind of hedge that amounted to buying stocks and short selling stock market futures, the idea being that if stocks began to fall, the market futures would also fall, and so your short position would increase to offset your losses. The strategy was designed so that you wouldn’t sell too many futures short, because that would eat into your profits if the market went up. Instead, you would program a computer to gradually sell your stocks if the market fell, and you would short just enough market futures to cover those losses. When the market crashed in 1987, though, everyone with portfolio insurance tried to sell their stocks at the same time. The trouble with this was that there were no buyers — everyone was selling! This meant that the computers trying to execute the trades ended up selling at much lower prices than the people who had designed the portfolio insurance had expected, and the carefully calculated short positions in market futures did little to protect investors. (In fact, investors holding portfolio insurance tended to do better than those who didn’t hold it; however, many people think the automated sell orders associated with portfolio insurance exacerbated the sell-off, and so everyone suffered because portfolio insurance was so prevalent.) The Black-Scholes-based calculations underlying portfolio insurance didn’t anticipate the possibility of a crash, because the random walk model indicates that a major one-day drop like this wouldn’t happen in a million years." (Chapter:5 Physics Hits the Street)
- "Markets themselves seemed to change in the wake of the crash. Whereas in the years leading up to the crash the Black-Scholes model seemed to get options prices exactly right, in virtually all contexts and all markets, after the crash certain discrepancies began to appear. These discrepancies are often called the volatility smile because of their distinctive shape in certain graphs. The smile appeared suddenly and presented a major mystery for financial engineers in the early 1990s, when its prevalence was first recognized." (Chapter:5 Physics Hits the Street)
- "One way of interpreting the smile is as an indication that the market believes large shifts in prices are more likely than the Black-Scholes model assumes. This is just what Mandelbrot had been claiming all along: that probability distributions describing market returns have fat tails, which means that extreme events are more likely than one would predict based on a normal distribution. In other words, market forces seemed to have brought prices into line with Mandelbrot’s theory." (Chapter:5 Physics Hits the Street)
- "Take the 2008 crash as an example. During the financial meltdown, even sophisticated investors, such as the banks that produced securitized loans in the first place, appear to have been mistaken about how risky these products were. In other words, the models that were supposed to make these products risk-free for their manufacturers failed, utterly. Models have failed in other market disasters as well — perhaps most notably when Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM), a small private investment firm whose strategy team included Myron Scholes among others, imploded. LTCM had a successful run from its founding in 1994 until the early summer of 1998, when Russia defaulted on its state debts. Then, in just under four months, LTCM lost $4.6 billion. By September, its assets had disappeared. The firm was heavily invested in derivatives markets, with obligations to every major bank in the world, totaling about $1 trillion. Yet at the close of trading on September 22, its market positions were worth about $500 million — a tiny fraction of what they had been worth a few months before, and far too little to cover the company’s loans. A feather’s weight would have led to a default on hundreds of billions of dollars of debt, leading to an immediate international panic, had the government not stepped in to resolve the crisis." (Chapter:5 Physics Hits the Street)
- " In this, financial modeling is much like mathematical modeling in engineering and science more generally. Models fail. Sometimes we can anticipate when they will fail, as Greenbaum and Struve did; in other cases, we figure out what went wrong only as we are trying to put the pieces back together. This simple fact should urge caution as we develop and implement new modeling techniques, and as we continue to apply older ones. Still, if we have learned anything in the last three hundred years, it’s that the basic methodological principles of scientific progress are the best ones we’ve got — and it would be foolish to abandon them just because they aren’t always perfect." (Chapter:5 Physics Hits the Street)
- "The basic idea of chaos is summed up by another accidental contribution of Lorenz’s: the so-called butterfly effect, which takes its name from a paper that Lorenz gave at the 1972 meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science called “Predictability: Does the Flap of a Butterfly’s Wings in Brazil Set Off a Tornado in Texas?” (Lorenz never took credit for the title. He claimed one of the conference organizers came up with it when Lorenz forgot to submit one.) Lorenz never answered the question asked in the title of his talk, but the implication was clear: a small change in initial conditions can have a huge impact on events down the road. But the real moral is that, even though chaotic systems are deterministic — in the sense that an infinitely precise description at any given instant can in principle lead to an accurate prediction — it is simply impossible to capture the state of the world with such precision. You can never account for all the flaps of all the butterflies across the globe. And even the tiniest errors will quickly explode into enormous differences. The result is that, even though weather is deterministic, it seems random because we can never know enough about butterflies." (Chapter:6 The Prediction Company)
- "Lorenz had discovered many of the basic principles and had then come up with simple examples of chaotic systems and described how they behaved. He was the first person to recognize that there is a kind of order in chaotic systems: if you draw pictures of the paths traced by objects obeying differential equations, they tend to settle down into regular patterns. These patterns are called attractors, because they tend to attract the paths of the objects. In roulette, for instance, the attractors correspond to the pockets of the wheel: whatever trajectory the ball takes, in the long run it will settle down into one of these states. But for other systems, the attractors can be much more complicated. A major contribution to the study of chaos theory was the realization that if a system is chaotic, these attractors have a highly intricate fractal structure." (Chapter:6 The Prediction Company)
- "Work had been done in fits and starts" (Chapter:6 The Prediction Company)
- "The collective’s most important paper, published in 1980, showed how you could use a stream of data from, say, a sensor placed in the middle of a pipe with water flowing through it to reconstruct what the attractor for the system would have to be. And once you had the attractor, an essential part of trying to understand how a chaotic system would behave over time, you could begin to make some predictions. Previously, attractors were understood as a theoretical tool, something you could get only by solving equations. Packard, Farmer, Shaw, and Crutchfield showed that, in fact, you could figure out this important feature empirically, by looking at how the system actually behaved." (Chapter:6 The Prediction Company)
- "Instead, the fifteen years that Farmer and Packard spent working on chaos theory gave them an unprecedented (by 1991 standards) understanding of how complex systems work, and the ability to use computers and mathematics in ways that someone trained in economics (or even in most areas of physics) would never have imagined possible. Their experience with chaos theory helped them appreciate how regular patterns — patterns with real predictive power — could be masked by the appearance of randomness. Their experience also showed them how to apply the right statistical measures to identify truly predictive patterns, how to test data against their models of market behavior, and finally how to figure out when those models were no longer doing their job. They were at ease with the statistical properties of fat-tailed distributions and wild randomness, which are characteristic of complex systems in physics as well as financial markets. This meant that they could easily apply some of Mandelbrot’s ideas for risk management in ways that people with more traditional economics training could not." (Chapter:6 The Prediction Company)
- "One strategy they used was something called statistical arbitrage, which works by betting that certain statistical properties of stocks will tend to return even if they disappear briefly. The classic example is pairs trading. Pairs trading works by observing that some companies’ stock prices are usually closely correlated. Consider Pepsi and Coca-Cola. Virtually any news that isn’t company-specific is likely to affect Pepsi’s products in just the same way as Coca-Cola’s, which means that the two stock prices usually track one another. But changes in the two companies’ prices don’t always occur simultaneously, so sometimes the prices get out of whack compared to their long-term behavior. If Pepsi goes up a little bit but Coca-Cola doesn’t, upsetting the usual relationship, you buy Coca-Cola and sell Pepsi because you have good reason to think that the two prices will soon revert to normal. Farmer and Packard didn’t come up with pairs trading — it was largely pioneered in the 1980s at Morgan Stanley, by an astrophysicist named Nunzio Tartaglia and a computer scientist named Gerry Bamberger — but they did bring a new level of rigor and sophistication to the identification and testing of the statistical relationships underlying the strategy." (Chapter:6 The Prediction Company)
- " This sophistication was purely a function of the tools that Farmer and Packard were able to import from their days in physics. For instance, as a physicist, Packard was at the very forefront of research in a variety of computer programs known as genetic algorithms. (An algorithm is just a set of instructions that can be used to solve a particular problem.) Suppose you are trying to identify the ideal conditions under which to perform some experiment. A traditional approach might involve a long search for the perfect answer. This could take many forms, but it would be a direct attack. Genetic algorithms, on the other hand, approach such problems indirectly. You start with a whole bunch of would-be solutions, a wide variety of possible experimental configurations, say, which then compete with one another, like animals vying for resources. The most successful possible solutions are then broken up and recombined in novel ways to produce a second generation of solutions, which are allowed to compete again. And so on. It’s survival of the fittest, where fitness is determined by some standard of optimality, such as how well an experiment would work under a given set of conditions. It turns out that in many cases, genetic algorithms find optimal or nearly optimal solutions to difficult physics problems very quickly." (Chapter:6 The Prediction Company)
- "Notice that in these cases, the basic strategy is clear. But there are all sorts of possibilities compatible with that basic strategy. To be perfectly scientific about the problem, you would want to figure out just how closely correlated the two prices are, and whether the degree of correlation varies with other market conditions. You would also want to think about how much rice to buy and how to time your purchase to be maximally certain that yen were really going up. But trying to come up with a way of relating all of these variables in an optimal way from scratch would be an enormously time-consuming and difficult process, and you could never be sure you’d gotten it right. In the meantime, your opportunity would pass. But if you used a genetic algorithm, you could let thousands of closely related models and trading strategies based on the supposed connection between yen and rice compete with one another. You would soon arrive at an optimal, or nearly optimal, strategy. This is a variety of forecasting, but it doesn’t require you to come up with some complete chaos-theoretic description of markets. It’s much more piecemeal than that." (Chapter:6 The Prediction Company)
- "This kind of modeling, where one uses algorithmic methods to identify optimal strategies, is often called “black box” modeling in the financial industry. Black box models are very different from models like Black-Scholes and its predecessors, whose inner workings are not only transparent but often provide deep insights into why the models (should) work. Black box models are much more opaque, and as a result they are often scarier, especially to people who don’t understand where they come from or why they should be trusted. Black box models were occasionally used before the Prediction Company came along, but the Prediction Company was one of the very first companies to build an entire business model based on them. It was a whole new way of thinking about trading." (Chapter:6 The Prediction Company)
- "Another knowledgeable source told me that, over the firm’s first fifteen years, its risk-adjusted return was almost one hundred times larger than the S&P 500 return over the same period." (Chapter:6 The Prediction Company)
- "It’s reasonable to be skeptical about the company’s success. Investing can often come down to luck. That markets are random is not just conventional wisdom in economics departments. There’s an enormous amount of statistical evidence to support it. Then again, perhaps the idea that markets are random because they are efficient — in the sense that market prices quickly change to account for all available information concerning the expected future performance of a stock — is not necessarily in conflict with the Prediction Company’s success. It sounds like a paradox. But think about the basis for the efficient market hypothesis. The standard argument goes something like this: Suppose that there was some way to game the markets; that is, suppose that there was some reliable way to predict how prices are going to change over time. Then investors would quickly try to capitalize on that information. If markets are always at a local high in the last week of May, or if they always drop on the Monday following a Giants victory, then as soon as the pattern gets noticed, sophisticated investors will start selling stocks at the end of May and buying them as soon as the Giants win — with the result that prices will drop at the end of May and rise on Mondays after Giants victories, essentially washing out the pattern. Sure enough, every time an economist appears to find an anomalous pattern in market behavior, it seems to correct itself before the next study can be done to confirm it." (Chapter:6 The Prediction Company)
- "These sophisticated investors are what make the markets random, at least according to the standard line. But they do so by correctly identifying predictive patterns when they arise. Such patterns might disappear quickly. But if you’re the first person to notice such a pattern, the argument about self-correcting markets doesn’t apply. What does this mean? It means that even if you take the standard line on efficient markets seriously, there is still a place for sophisticated investors to profit. You just need to be the most sophisticated investor, the one most carefully attuned to market patterns, and the one best equipped to find ways to turn patterns into profit. And for this task, a few decades of experience in extracting information from chaotic systems plus a room full of supercomputers could be a big help. In other words, the Prediction Company succeeded by figuring out how to be the most sophisticated investor as often as possible." (Chapter:6 The Prediction Company)
- "black box models have taken hold on Wall Street. They are the principal tool of the quant hedge funds, from D. E. Shaw to Citadel. The prediction business has become an industry." (Chapter:6 The Prediction Company)
- "Recall that far-out-of-the-money options are options that will be valuable only if the market takes a dramatic swing. Since dramatic market swings tend to be unlikely, far-out-of-the-money options tend to be very inexpensive (because the people selling them believe they carry little risk). When markets crash, however, these far-out-of-the-money put options can become very valuable indeed, with almost no initial cost. And if you know when the market is going to crash, you can walk away with enormous profits accrued over a very short time — just a few days, say — with relatively little risk. It sure beats buy-and-hold. The problem, of course, is predicting the unpredictable." (Chapter:7 Tyranny of the Dragon King)
- "Imagine inflating a balloon. You start with a limp piece of rubber. In this uninflated state, the balloon is stretchy and very difficult to tear. You could poke it and prod it any way you like, even with a very sharp knife, and unless you stretch the balloon out first, the knife is unlikely to puncture it. A pin would do no damage at all. Now begin to blow air into it. After a few puffs, the balloon starts to expand. The pressure from the air inside is pushing the walls of the balloon out, just enough to give the surface a roughly spherical shape. The material still has considerable give. Depending on how much air has been pumped in, a very sharp knife might now slice the rubber, but the balloon certainly won’t pop, even if you manage to puncture it. A puncture would allow the air inside to leak, but it wouldn’t be very dramatic. As you blow more air into the balloon, however, it becomes increasingly sensitive to outside effects. A fully inflated balloon is liable to pop from the slightest brush with a tree branch or a bit of concrete — a tap from a pin is certain to make it explode. Indeed, if you keep blowing air into a balloon, you can make it burst by touching it with your fingertips, or by simply blowing in another mouthful of air. Once the balloon is primed, it doesn’t take much to produce a very dramatic effect: the balloon shreds into tiny pieces faster than the speed of sound." (Chapter:7 Tyranny of the Dragon King)
- "What makes a balloon pop? In some sense, it’s an external cause: a tree branch or a pin, or perhaps the pressure from your fingers as you hold it. But these very same influences, under most circumstances, have little or no effect on the balloon. The balloon needs to be inflated, or even overinflated, for the external cause to take hold. Moreover, the particular external cause doesn’t much matter — it’s far more important that the balloon be highly inflated when it is pricked. In fact, the external cause of a popped balloon isn’t what makes the balloon pop at all. It’s the internal instability in the balloon’s state that makes it susceptible to an explosive pop. The bursting of a balloon is one of a variety of phenomena known as ruptures. Ruptures occur in all sorts of materials when they are put under stress. A rupture can often be thought of as a straw-that-broke-the-camel’s-back effect: the stress on a substance, such as high internal pressure (caused, for instance, by the air in a balloon, or the gas in a soda can that has been shaken up — or the accumulated weight on a camel’s back), leads to instabilities that in turn make the material vulnerable to explosive events. These explosions, sometimes called critical events, are the ruptures. Just as when a balloon bursts, a rupturing material changes its state very rapidly, releasing a substantial amount of energy in the process. Events that might otherwise have little effect, like a pin breaking the surface of an only partially inflated balloon, tend to cascade, building into something larger." (Chapter:7 Tyranny of the Dragon King)
- "decision theory (a branch of economics and psychology" (Chapter:7 Tyranny of the Dragon King)
- "One of Sornette’s earliest scientific projects involved ruptures in Kevlar, a synthetic fiber developed in 1965 by Du Pont (and heir to the nylon tradition described earlier). It is a famously strong substance, used in the bulletproof vests worn by police and soldiers, and even as a replacement for steel in suspension bridge cables. It is stronger at very cold temperatures than at room temperature, and it is largely stable at extremely high heat, at least for short periods. It’s a marvel of modern chemistry." (Chapter:7 Tyranny of the Dragon King)
- "We know that if a balloon is inflated sufficiently, it will nearly always pop when pricked with a sharp pin. Other substances, though, can be trickier to figure out. Materials like Kevlar will eventually rupture from the strain of high-pressure contents, but determining precisely when, or why, is a surprisingly difficult problem. When substances like Kevlar are put under significant stress, tiny fractures begin to appear. Sometimes these fractures combine and grow into slightly larger fractures. Sometimes these slightly larger fractures grow into still-larger fractures, and so on, until you get a very large fracture. These fractures follow a pattern we have already seen: they are fractals, where the tiniest fractures look just like the larger ones. " (Chapter:7 Tyranny of the Dragon King)
- "Sometimes, though, the various parts of the material begin to conspire with one another. They display a kind of herding effect. This can happen for various reasons: heat, say, or pressure, or other external effects. When this occurs, it’s almost as if the various parts of the material have unionized. A kick in one place can ripple through a whole tank, with small localized influences leading to dramatic effects, much as a pinprick in one place can make an inflated balloon tear itself apart. This kind of conspiracy is sometimes called self-organization, because no matter how random and uncorrelated the materials are to begin with, if they are placed under stress, they will begin to coordinate their activity. It’s as though the bits and pieces of material begin to stir under pressure, gradually deciding to join together in common cause. Sornette didn’t come up with the notion of self-organization, though he has done as much work on the theory as anyone. Instead, he realized something slightly different. He finally understood how a small labor strike differs from a catastrophic one. All strikes are caused by the same sorts of sparks: an egregious injury; an unfair termination; cut wages. You might think that there’s no way of telling which such events will lead to a nationwide walkout. A large strike looks like a small strike that, for whatever reason, simply didn’t stop. So, too, with the microfractures that, under some circumstances, seem to explode into ruptures that tear a material apart. But the biggest strikes require something more than just a spark: they require a labor movement, with a high degree of structure and a capacity for coordinated action. They require a mechanism for system-wide feedback and amplification, something to transform an otherwise small event into a large one. In other words, if you want to predict a major strike, don’t look for the grievances. Those are always there. Look for the unions. Look for telltale patterns of self-organization. Coordination, rather than the pinpricks, is what really leads to critical events. And Sornette would take that insight straight to the bank." (Chapter:7 Tyranny of the Dragon King)
- "Geophysicists study a broad swath of topics concerning the internal structure of planets. But their bread and butter, the research that gets funding agencies most excited, is predicting natural disasters like earthquakes and volcanoes. Earthquake prediction is a matter of particular importance, for both scientific and humanitarian reasons. It is also famously difficult, though this hasn’t stopped scientists, and before that philosophers and astrologers, from trying their hand. The ancient Roman historian Aelian, for instance, hinted that animals could accurately predict earthquakes, claiming that snakes and weasels evacuated the Greek city of Helice a few days in advance of an earthquake that devastated the region. An ancient Indian astrologer and mathematician named Varahamihira believed that earthquakes could be predicted by looking for particular cloud patterns." (Chapter:7 Tyranny of the Dragon King)
- "This model accounted for how degrees of organization and coordination could serve to amplify fractures, to turn small causes into large effects. It was while thinking about this model that Sornette realized that if all of the pieces were in place for a critical event, an explosive rupture, the way in which the fractures leading up to the rupture would multiply would be affected. The idea was that a rupture would be preceded by smaller events, following a very specific, accelerating pattern. This pattern is called log-periodic because the time between the smaller events decreases in a particular way, related to the logarithm of the time. Since this pattern would occur only if the system were primed for a rupture, it counted as a signal that a critical event was about to occur. And because the pattern was one that accelerated over time, if you looked at a few of the smaller events in a row, you could determine whether they were showing the log-periodic behavior (because the time between the events would be shrinking), and you could extrapolate forward in time to figure out when the peaks would collapse into one another, thus predicting the critical event." (Chapter:7 Tyranny of the Dragon King)
- "One of the most striking things about the October 27 crash, and the reason it is now referred to as a “mini crash,” is that New York markets rebounded the next day. By the close of trading on the twenty-eighth, the Dow had regained 60% of the previous day’s losses. And in a striking counterpoint to closing its doors early for the first time the day before, October 28 was the first day that over a billion shares were traded on the NYSE. This kind of dramatic seesawing is telling: since the cumulative effect of the crash and rebound was a relatively modest change in prices, standard reasoning about pricing in an efficient market does not seem to apply. That is, any theory of the stock market that accounts for price changes in terms of the actual values of the companies whose stocks are being traded would predict that a crash would correspond to some dramatic change in the real-world values. But this didn’t happen. Stocks were worth more or less the same amount on October 29 as they had been on October 26, indicating that most investors didn’t think the values of the companies had changed all that much. Instead, it seems that the crash resulted from some sort of internal instability in the markets themselves." (Chapter:7 Tyranny of the Dragon King)
- "According to Sornette and his collaborators, this is a feature that shows up in many market crashes. As he is fond of pointing out, the standard economic reasoning suggests that if bubbles are possible at all, they can end only with some dramatic news that materially changes the value of firms whose stocks are being traded. And yet, many economists agree that if you look at particular crashes, it is often very hard to identify what that piece of news could have been. Sure, there’s always some piece of bad news to associate with a market crash. But one is often stuck blaming extreme events on run-of-the-mill external causes that do not seem to change the value of the things being traded. This alone should be highly suggestive, at least to someone who is accustomed to thinking about critical phenomena in physics, because it implies that even if a piece of news is the immediate cause of a crash, there is something about the state of the market that determines whether the market actually crashes, or just closes a few points lower. And as with ruptures and earthquakes, Sornette argues, even if you cannot predict the news, you can try to identify when the market is in a precarious state. Just look for the log-periodic tremors." (Chapter:7 Tyranny of the Dragon King)
- "Critical phenomena often have what physicists call universal properties. This means that you can start with two materials that look as different from one another as can be — a Kevlar tank, for instance, and tectonic plates — and find that, despite the profound differences in their microscopic details, under certain circumstances they exhibit the exact same large-scale behaviors. " (Chapter:7 Tyranny of the Dragon King)
- "Their joint paper showed how to price options even if the underlying stock does not follow the kind of random walk assumed by Black and Scholes. This effectively extended the theory of options pricing to more sophisticated models of price changes, including those with fat-tailed distributions. (O’Connor and Associates had already done work along these lines — but this wasn’t widely known.)" (Chapter:7 Tyranny of the Dragon King)
- "As with his theories of material rupture and earthquakes, the central idea behind Sornette’s market-crash-as-critical-event hypothesis involves collective action, or herding behavior. By itself, this is hardly surprising, as the suggestion that market crashes have something to do with mob psychology is old: in 1841, Charles Mackay wrote a book on, among other things, economic bubbles that he called Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds. There, he pointed to several historical cases in which entire countries had been taken by some sort of frenzy, leading to speculative bubbles — market conditions under which prices become entirely divorced from the value of the things being traded. Perhaps the most striking example occurred in the Netherlands in the early seventeenth century. The subject of speculation was tulip bulbs. Tulips originated in Turkey but made their way into western Europe, via Austria, in the middle of the sixteenth century. The flowers were considered very beautiful and were highly prized by the European aristocracy, but the real money was in tulip bulbs, which could be used both to produce the flowers and to produce new bulbs. Tulips came to represent Dutch imperial power. The country’s new merchant class, made wealthy by trade in the Dutch East and West Indies, would broadcast its power and prestige with ornate flower gardens, with tulips as the centerpiece. So tulip bulbs were a valuable commodity. But how valuable? During the 1630s, prices began to grow rapidly. By 1635, trades worth 2,500 Dutch guilders (worth roughly $30,000 in 2010 dollars) for a single bulb were recorded. Trades of 1,500 guilders were common. In contrast, a skilled laborer could expect to make about 150 guilders in a year. Around this time, foreign money began to pour into the market as outsiders tried to make a quick buck in the tulip game. The Dutch were thrilled. They took the foreign investment to mean that all of Europe was catching on to their tulip craze, and so they doubled down: ordinary people sold their belongings, mortgaged their houses, and exhausted their savings to participate in the tulip market. Tulips bulbs are typically planted in the fall and then harvested in the late spring. But winter was the prime time for speculation because this was when would-be investors had the least information about the supply for the coming year: the old bulbs had been planted but the new bulbs and cut flowers were not yet available. It was during the winter of 1636–37 that tulip mania (as it is now called) reached its height. That winter, a single bulb sold for as much as 5,200 guilders (more than $60,000 for one tulip bulb!). And then one day in February 1637, at an otherwise ordinary tulip auction in Haarlem, the bidding stopped too soon. Apparently no one had invited the next batch of tulip fools. That day, prized tulips sold for just a fraction of what they had even one day before. Panic spread quickly, and within days prices had fallen to less than 1% of their height. Fortunes that had been made overnight vanished by morning. The Dutch economy teetered, until ultimately the government needed to intervene." (Chapter:7 Tyranny of the Dragon King)
- "Despite Sornette’s enormous productivity in finance, he resists the idea that he has “switched over” to economics. Since 2006, he has held the Chair of Entrepreneurial Risks at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zürich (usually abbreviated ETH Zürich) — his first finance-related academic position — but he maintains a part-time position in geophysics at UCLA, and also a full-time appointment as a geophysicist in ETH Zürich’s physics department. He continues to write articles and supervise students in both fields. And if you ask him what prompted the change in focus of his work, since surely there was a shift in the mid-1990s when he began working on new topics, he replies, with some bewilderment, that he has always been interested in such things. After all, he is interested in everything." (Chapter:7 Tyranny of the Dragon King)
- "Since first predicting the October 1997 crash, Sornette has had a remarkable track record of identifying when market crashes will occur. He saw the log-periodic pattern in advance of the September 2008 crash, for instance, and was able to predict the timing. Similarly, the 1998 collapse in the Russian ruble that brought Long-Term Capital Management to its knees showed the signs of an impending crash — indeed, Sornette has claimed that even though the largely unanticipated Russian debt default may have triggered the market turmoil that summer, the crash showed the log-periodic precursors characteristic of herding behavior. This means that a market crash would likely have occurred during that period whether the ruble had collapsed or not. The balloon was already in a primed state; Russia’s default was just the pinprick." (Chapter:7 Tyranny of the Dragon King)
- "The methods Sornette has used to identify bubbles and predict when crashes will occur can also be used to identify a situation that Sornette has called an anti-bubble. These are cases in which stock prices are artificially low. On January 25, 1999, for instance, Sornette posted a paper on an online physics archive claiming that, based on his observation of log-periodic patterns in the market data, the Japanese Nikkei stock index was in the midst of an anti-bubble. The paper included quite precise predictions: Sornette indicated that by the end of that year, the Nikkei would increase by 50%. This prediction was all the more remarkable because the Japanese market was near its fourteen-year low, which it reached on January 5, 1999. All indications were that the market would continue to fall — an opinion held by most economists at the time. Nobel Prize laureate and New York Times opinion columnist Paul Krugman, for instance, wrote on January 20 that the Japanese economy was beginning to look like a tragedy, and that there simply wasn’t enough demand for a recovery. But time proved Sornette right. By the end of the year, the Nikkei had recovered, by precisely the 50% Sornette predicted." (Chapter:7 Tyranny of the Dragon King)
- "Mandelbrot’s work gave some economists reason to think that markets are wildly random, exhibiting behavior that someone like Bachelier or Osborne could never have imagined. Even if Mandelbrot turned out to be wrong in the details of his proposal, he nonetheless revealed that financial markets are governed by fat-tailed distributions. There’s nothing special about extreme financial events. They are not exceptions; they are the norm — and worse, they happen all the time, for the same reason as more mundane events. Big market drawdowns, at their core, are just smaller drawdowns that didn’t stop." (Chapter:7 Tyranny of the Dragon King)
- "This concern is at the heart of hedge fund manager Nassim Taleb’s argument against modeling in finance. In his book The Black Swan, Taleb explains that some events — he calls them “black swans” — are so far from standard, normal distribution expectations that you cannot even make sense of questions about their likelihood. They are essentially unpredictable, and yet when they occur, they change everything. Taleb takes it to be a consequence of Mandelbrot’s arguments that these kinds of extreme events, the events with the most dramatic consequences, occur much more frequently than any model can account for. To trust a mathematical model in a wildly random system like a financial market is foolish, then, because the models exclude the most important phenomena: the catastrophic crashes." (Chapter:7 Tyranny of the Dragon King)
- "Recently, Sornette introduced a new term for extreme events. Instead of black swans, he calls them “dragon kings.” He used the word king because, if you try to match plots like Pareto’s law — the fat-tailed distribution governing income disparity that Mandelbrot studied at IBM — to countries that have a monarchy, you find that kings don’t fit with the 80–20 rule. Kings control far more wealth than they ought to, even by the standards of fat tails. They are true outliers. And they, not the extremely wealthy just below them, are the ones who really exert control. The word dragon, meanwhile, is supposed to capture the fact that these kinds of events don’t have a natural place in the normal bestiary. They’re unlike anything else. Many large earthquakes are little ones that, for whatever reason, didn’t stop. These are not predictable using Sornette’s methods. But dragon-king earthquakes, the critical events, seem to require more. Like ruptures, they happen only if all sorts of things fall into place in just the right way. A good example of a dragon king is the city of Paris. France’s cities follow Zipf’s law remarkably well. The distribution of cities in France is fat-tailed, in that the very biggest cities are much bigger than the next biggest cities. But if you plot the size of French cities by their population size, as Zipf’s law would have you do, Paris is still much too big. It breaks the mold." (Chapter:7 Tyranny of the Dragon King)
- "The idea is that the value of a Big Mac hamburger from McDonald’s is a reliable constant that can be used to compare the value of money in different countries and at different times.) Together, Malaney and Weinstein developed an entirely novel way of solving the index number problem by adapting a tool from mathematical physics known as gauge theory. (The early mathematical development of modern gauge theory — the topic on which Weinstein wrote his dissertation — was largely the work of Jim Simons, the mathematical physicist turned hedge fund manager who founded Renaissance Technologies in the 1980s.) Gauge theories use geometry to compare apparently incomparable physical quantities. This, Malaney and Weinstein argued, was precisely what was at issue in the index number problem — although there, instead of incomparable physical quantities, one was trying to compare different economic variables." (Chapter:8 A New Manhattan Project)
- "If you move an arrow along a path on a curved surface, being careful to keep the arrow pointing in the same direction at all times, the direction that the arrow points at the end of the path will depend on the path taken. Mathematicians call this property of curved surfaces “path dependence of parallel transport.” In this figure, there are two paths around a sphere. The first path takes the arrow from point A around the equator and back to point A. At the end of the trip, the arrow faces the same direction as when it began. The second trip again starts at point A and travels around the equator, but only halfway. On the other side of the sphere, the path moves up over the North Pole and returns to point A that way. At the end of this trip, the arrow is pointing in the opposite direction from when the trip began. Weyl observed that it was possible to construct physical theories in which not only was direction path dependent, but so was the length of an arrow. The physical world doesn’t actually work that way, but in the years since Weyl first came up with his theory — which he called a gauge theory — many physicists and mathematicians have adapted the mathematics he invented to other problems, with much more success." (Chapter:8 A New Manhattan Project)
- " Einstein’s theory of general relativity makes essential use of the fact that space and time are curved in the sense that parallel transport is path dependent. But Weyl thought that Einstein hadn’t gone far enough. In general relativity, if you begin with an arrow at one place and then move it around a path that brings it back to the starting point, it might face a different direction. But it will always have the same length. Weyl thought this was an arbitrary distinction that couldn’t have physical meaning, and so he came up with an alternative theory in which length, too, was path dependent, so that if you moved a ruler around two different closed paths, it would have different lengths when it returned to the starting point, depending on the path it took. Weyl called his new theory a gauge theory. It was the first time the term had been used, and it was based on the idea that there was no universal, once-and-for-all way to “gauge,” or measure, the length of a ruler" (Chapter:8 A New Manhattan Project)
- "These theories, now known as Yang-Mills theories, spawned what is sometimes called the gauge revolution. Beginning in 1961, fundamental physics was rewritten in terms of gauge theory — a process that only accelerated when Yang, in collaboration with Jim Simons of Renaissance, realized a deep connection between Yang-Mills gauge theories and modern geometry later that decade. Gauge theories proved particularly important in physics because they proved to be a natural setting to look for “unified” theories, where what was being unified was the standard by which different quantities were compared in the theories. By 1973, it appeared that the three fundamental forces of particle physics — electromagnetism, the weak force, and the strong force — had been unified into a single gauge-theoretic framework. This framework was called the Standard Model of particle physics. Today, it is the single best-confirmed theory ever discovered, in any field. It is the very heart of modern physics." (Chapter:8 A New Manhattan Project)
- "When Coase tried to formalize an answer to social cost problems like this one, he came to a striking conclusion. It doesn’t matter what the sheriff does, at least from a long-term perspective, as long as three conditions are met: the damages involved must be adequately quantified, some well-defined notion of property must be instituted, and bargaining must be free. To see why this would be, consider what would happen if the sheriff told the rancher he could have as many cattle as he liked, but that he had to pay for all of the damage his herd inflicted. In essence, the rancher has incurred an additional cost to raising cows. Depending on how much damage gets done, and how much soybeans are worth, it may well make sense for the rancher to keep adding head to his herd even while paying the farmer for the soybeans that keep getting destroyed. If the rancher really is paying for the value of the soybeans, the farmer shouldn’t care whether the revenue comes from selling the soybeans himself or from the rancher’s compensation — in fact, he might as well think of the rancher as a customer buying whatever soybeans the cattle destroy. Ultimately, the rancher and farmer will reach an agreement about how many cattle the rancher will own based on what is maximally profitable for both parties. But what if the sheriff makes some other choice? If the farmer has to pay the rancher to keep his cattle from destroying the farmer’s crops, one would expect the exact same bargaining to occur. Coase’s theorem says that the endpoint will always be the same: both parties will agree on an arrangement that is maximally profitable for everyone." (Chapter:8 A New Manhattan Project)
- "Arrow’s theorem, a famous result in social choice theory that essentially proves that if you have a group of people trying to choose between three or more options, there is no voting system that can turn the ranked preferences of all of the individuals in the community into a fair community-wide ranking." (Chapter:8 A New Manhattan Project)
- "It was a masterful sleight of hand. " (Chapter:8 A New Manhattan Project)
- "From this perspective, Bachelier represents a first volley, the initial attempt to apply new ideas from statistical physics to an entirely different set of problems. He laid the groundwork for a revolutionary way of thinking about markets. But his work was littered with problems. Most obvious, from the point of view of Samuelson and Osborne, was that the normal distribution he described for stock prices worked only under the very unusual circumstances that prevailed at the Paris Bourse, where there was very little variation in prices. Correcting this problem led to Osborne’s hypothesis that returns, not prices, are normally distributed. Mandelbrot’s realization that normal and log-normal distributions cannot capture the full wildness of financial markets, then, didn’t represent some crisis at the foundations of financial theory, despite his and others’ claims to the contrary — rather, it was the first recognition of how Osborne’s version of the random walk hypothesis would run aground. That most economists (and physicists interested in such things) now believe that Mandelbrot, too, wasn’t quite right is simply another iteration still. Thorp and Black showed investors how to use the tools developed by Bachelier, Osborne, and Mandelbrot in day-to-day trading — by drawing on still more sophisticated ideas from physics. In some sense, these two scientists are the most important in this book, both because of their pivotal role in putting cutting-edge theory into practice and because they reveal what is involved in using one set of models to build new ones. The options pricing models that Thorp and Black and Scholes developed were based on Osborne’s version of the random walk hypothesis, not on Mandelbrot’s. This meant that these options pricing models should have been recognized, from the very beginning, as tools with a limited range of applicability. From a physicist’s point of view, or an engineer’s, starting with Osborne’s model made perfect sense. It was far better understood than Mandelbrot’s, and so, by adopting a simpler approximation of how market returns really work, Thorp and Black and Scholes were able to turn an extremely difficult problem into a tractable one. But there was little doubt, even from the beginning, about how these early options pricing models would fail, given Mandelbrot’s work: they would misprice extreme events. (Black seemed to recognize the shortcomings of his model as well as anyone — in a 1988 article called “The Holes in Black-Scholes,” Black explicitly listed the unrealistic assumptions that went into deriving his formula and described how each of these could lead to errors.) Careful investors, like Michael Greenbaum and Clay Struve at O’Connor and Associates, were able to use their understanding of when the Black-Scholes model would fail to profit and, even more importantly, to protect themselves during the 1987 market crash. Yet still, the process continues. Both the scientists behind the Prediction Company and Didier Sornette show how new developments in physics can be used to fill in gaps in the random walk, efficient markets thinking behind the Black-Scholes model. The Prediction Company did this by using black box models to identify local, short-term inefficiencies and capitalize on them as quickly as possible — essentially using physics to be the most sophisticated investors in the market. Sornette, meanwhile, has taken Mandelbrot’s observation that in wildly random markets, extreme events like market crashes have dominating effects, and asked whether it is possible to predict these catastrophes. The tools he has adapted from seismology go a long way toward showing that dragon kings can be seen from afar." (Chapter:Epilogue)
- "The quant crisis was the first signal that all was not well in this shadow banking system. The whole system was built on the assumption that U.S. housing markets wouldn’t decline. When they did, beginning in 2006, the system began to crumble, and when the decline accelerated in 2007, panic set in. Defaults occurred, mainly among homeowners who were already perceived as high risk, the beneficiaries of so-called subprime mortgages. This sudden high default rate, in turn, made the securities based on subprime mortgages rapidly lose value, as no one was sure whether the promised interest rates would be paid. The quant crisis resulted when a small handful of hedge funds were told they needed to put up more collateral for the loans they used to finance their investment, which in turn meant they needed to sell quickly to raise cash. Most of the quant funds used similar methods, which meant they often had very similar portfolios — so that when one fund started to liquidate, it pushed all of their holdings, including the ones that were supposed to act as insurance, lower. This rapid and unexpected loss then forced other funds to sell, too, leading to a vicious cycle where everyone involved lost a lot of money. (This is a perfect example of how Sornette’s herding effects can lead to crashes.) The quant crisis, and its reverberations later in 2007, were just the beginning. The next casualty was the eighty-five-year-old investment bank Bear Stearns, in March 2008. Bear Stearns had been a major player in the shadow banking system, producing many of the securitized loans that served as collateral. When the underlying mortgages started to see ever-higher default rates, Bear Stearns’s depositors started to get edgy. Starting in the middle of the month, some of Bear Stearns’s biggest customers asked for their money back at the same time. First was Renaissance, James Simons’s firm, which wanted its $5 billion. Another $5 billion was pulled out by another hedge fund, D. E. Shaw. " (Chapter:Epilogue)
- "The securitization procedure by which subprime mortgages were turned into new products that behaved like bonds was based on a model developed by a statistician named David X. Li" (Chapter:Epilogue)
- "Li’s model had a fundamental flaw: it essentially assumed that default on one mortgage wouldn’t change the risk of default on other mortgages. As long as the default rate was low, this was a good assumption — a few isolated defaults didn’t have much effect on the housing market. But once the default rate picked up, sometime in 2006, the model stopped making sense. When lots of people defaulted on their mortgages, housing prices in the default-heavy neighborhoods dropped — leading to still more defaults. Moreover, the rise in defaults indicated some deeper problems in the economy." (Chapter:Epilogue)
- "It’s worth emphasizing once again that just as O’Connor survived the 1987 crash by being a little more sophisticated in how it used its models than anyone else, Jim Simons’s Renaissance Technologies returned 80% in 2008 — again by being smarter than the competition. What’s the difference between Renaissance and other hedge funds? It’s that Renaissance has figured out a way to do what my dissertation advisor claimed was impossible: do science on Wall Street. This has not involved airing its ideas publicly. Indeed, Renaissance is more secretive than most. But its employees haven’t forgotten how to think like physicists, how to question their assumptions and constantly search for the chinks in their models’ armor. " (Chapter:Epilogue)
- "The Obama administration has issued predictions that unemployment will hover around 8% through the end of 2012, with sluggish growth in GDP. Both political parties in the United States are simply repeating the same tried-and-failed policy proposals they’ve been trotting out for a generation. And it’s not just the United States. Most of southern Europe is on the verge of default on its sovereign debt — and despite Germany’s best efforts, it is hard to see how the euro has a future. Even China and India have shown signs of slowing down. Prospects look dim for the world economy. And the most remarkable thing of all is that no one seems to have any ideas about how to fix it." (Chapter:Epilogue)
- "Consider that throughout the last decades, and especially during the 2007–2008 crisis, the U.S. government, including its major regulatory groups, has always been a step behind even the least sophisticated banks and investment firms. They’re three steps behind the real innovators. When, in the lead-up to the crisis, banks failed to account for the risk associated with securitized loans, there was no one there to point out that the shadow banking system was built on a house of cards. It was only in the aftermath of the crash that new banking regulations made their way through Congress — and even then, the new regulations amounted to rudimentary policy changes designed to protect against yesterday’s risks." (Chapter:Epilogue)
