---
title: "Book Notes: The 5 Second Rule"
date: "2018-03-06"
categories: 
  - "research"
---

- "I knew what I needed to do but I couldn’t make myself take action. And that’s the thing that makes changing so hard. Change requires you to do things that feel hard and scary. Change requires courage and confidence—and I was tapped out of both. What I did do was spend a lot of time thinking. Thinking made everything worse. The more I thought about the situation that we were in, the more afraid I felt. That’s what your mind does when you focus on problems—it magnifies them. The more I worried, the more uncertain and overwhelmed I became. The more I thought, the more paralyzed I felt." (Chapter:2. How I Discovered the 5 Second Rule)
- "That’s one of the things I’ve learned using the #5SecondRule. When it comes to goals, dreams, and changing your life, your inner wisdom is a genius. Your goal-related impulses, urges, and instincts are there to guide you. You need to learn to bet on them. Because, as history proves, you’ll never know when your greatest inspiration will strike and where that discovery will lead you if you trust yourself enough to act on it." (Chapter:2. How I Discovered the 5 Second Rule)
- "The next morning the alarm rang at 6 a.m. and the first thing I felt was dread. It was dark. It was cold. It was winter in Boston and I did not want to wake up. I thought about the rocket launch and I immediately felt like it was stupid. Then, I did something that I had never done before—I ignored how I felt. I didn’t think. I did what needed to be done Instead of hitting the snooze button, I started counting. Backwards. 5..4..3..2..1.. And then I stood up. That was the exact moment I discovered the #5SecondRule." (Chapter:2. How I Discovered the 5 Second Rule)
- "reinvigorated" (Chapter:3. What You Can Expect When You Use It)
- "Forget motivation; it’s a myth. I don’t know when we all bought into the idea that in order to change you must “feel” eager or “feel” motivated to act. It’s complete garbage. The moment it’s time to assert yourself, you will not feel motivated. In fact, you won’t feel like doing anything at all. If you want to improve your life, you’ll need to get off your rear end and kick your own butt. In my world, I call that the power of a push." (Chapter:3. What You Can Expect When You Use It)
- "trudging" (Chapter:3. What You Can Expect When You Use It)
- "As I deconstructed the moment of change, I uncovered something fundamental about how each and every one of us is wired. Right before we’re about to do something that feels difficult, scary or uncertain, we hesitate. Hesitation is the kiss of death. You might hesitate for a just nanosecond, but that’s all it takes. That one small hesitation triggers a mental system that’s designed to stop you. And it happens in less than—you guessed it—five seconds. Ever notice how fast fear and self-doubt take over your head and you start making up excuses for why you shouldn’t say something or do something? We hold ourselves back in the smallest, most mundane moments every day, and that impacts everything. If you break this habit of hesitating and you find the courage to “take some kind of action,” you’ll be astonished by how fast your life changes. That’s what Keith discovered after learning the Rule at a RE/MAX convention. Now he’s able to “do extraordinary things.”" (Chapter:3. What You Can Expect When You Use It)
- "Metacognition, by the way, is just a fancy word for any technique that allows you to beat your brain in order to accomplish your greater goals." (Chapter:4. Why The Rule Works)
- "Using the Rule is simple. Whenever you feel an instinct fire up to act on a goal or a commitment, or the moment you feel that yourself hesitate on doing something and you know you should do, use the Rule." (Chapter:4. Why The Rule Works)
- "Start by counting backwards to yourself: 5- 4- 3- 2- 1. The counting will help you focus on the goal or commitment and distract you from the worries, thoughts, and fears in your mind. As soon as you reach “1,” move. That’s it. It’s so simple but let me hammer this home one more time. Anytime there’s something you know you should do, but you feel uncertain, afraid, or overwhelmed…just take control by counting backwards 5- 4- 3- 2- 1. That’ll quiet your mind. Then, move when you get to “1.”" (Chapter:4. Why The Rule Works)
- "Physical movement is the most important part of my Rule, too, because when you move your physiology changes and your mind follows. " (Chapter:4. Why The Rule Works)
- "Personally, I notice that the longer I wait between my initial impulse to act and physically moving, the louder that the excuses get, and the harder it becomes to force myself to move. " (Chapter:4. Why The Rule Works)
- "The only difference between that idea for a novel you want to write and British author E.L. James who wrote the blockbuster Fifty Shades of Gray trilogy (that was devoured by nearly every woman on the planet Earth and sold a million copies in four days) is the fact that she didn’t wait for permission, the right time, or to feel ready. She didn’t wait until she had a book deal. In fact, she started writing erotica on a Twilight-themed blog! She found the courage to start in small ways, and put herself out there over and over until she built the confidence to write a book. And Fifty Shades of Gray was that book. It was self-published by a working mom who wrote in her free time. Yup. By the way, that’s also how Grammy award-winning musician Ed Sheeran got discovered. He was 15 years old playing songs in a park in England with no permit and no guarantee that anyone would notice. That’s how you do it. You push yourself to get out of your comfort zone and you begin. There is no other way. You stop waiting for “the right time” and you start. That’s how award-winning Broad City landed its hit show on Comedy Central. They acted with courage and started filming 3-minute clips on an iPhone and posting them on YouTube." (Chapter:6. What Are You Waiting For?)
- "gritty" (Chapter:6. What Are You Waiting For?)
- "Life is not a one-and-done sort of deal. You’ve got to work for what you want. Do you know the game Angry Birds? Rovio, the brand that created the game, launched 51 unsuccessful games before they developed Angry Birds. How about The Avengers star Mark Ruffalo? Do you know how many auditions he did before he landed his first role? Almost 600! Even Babe Ruth struck out 1,330 times. My favorite vacuum cleaner is a Dyson. And there’s no wonder why it doesn’t suck at sucking up the dirt. James Dyson created 5,127 prototypes! What? And this last one will blow your mind. Picasso created nearly 100 masterpieces in his lifetime. But what most people don’t know is that he created a total of more than 50,000 works of art. Did you see the last number? 50,000. That’s two pieces of art a day. Success is a numbers game. And you’re not going to win it if you keep telling yourself to wait. The more often that you choose courage, the more likely you’ll succeed." (Chapter:6. What Are You Waiting For?)
- "Ever wonder how pro athletes achieve so much? Part of it is talent and practice, but another key element is a skill that you and I need in our lives—the ability to separate from our emotions and push our bodies and mouths to move. They may feel tired as the football game drags into the fourth quarter, but they don’t act tired. Feelings are merely suggestions, ones the greatest athletes and teams ignore. To change, you must do the same. You must ignore how you feel, and as Nike would tell you, Just Do It anyway." (Chapter:7. You’ll Never Feel Like It)
- "Third, I want you to experience a concept called “activation energy” and feel how hard it really is to push yourself to do simple things. In chemistry, “activation energy” is the minimum amount of energy required to begin a chemical reaction. Chemists have found that this initial amount of energy is much higher than the average amount of energy needed to keep the reaction going. What does that have to do with getting up? A lot. The initial amount of energy to push yourself out of bed is much higher than the energy you exert once you’re up and moving." (Chapter:8. How To Start Using the Rule)
- "change agnostic" (Chapter:How to Become the Most Productive Person You Know)
- "My Daily Routine 1. I get up when the alarm rings. We went over the importance of this when you learned about the Wake Up Challenge. The alarm rings. I get up. The end. For peak productivity, you should NEVER hit the snooze button. There’s actually a neurological reason why, one that I learned while conducting research for this book. You know that getting a good night’s sleep is important for productivity. But I bet you didn’t know that how you wake up is just as important as how you sleep.Scientists have recently discovered that when you hit the snooze button it has a negative impact on brain function and productivity that can last up to four hours! Here’s what you need to know. We sleep in cycles that take about 90 to 110 minutes to complete. About two hours before you wake up, these sleep cycles end and your body starts to slowly prepare to wake up. When your alarm rings, your body is in wakeup mode. If you hit the snooze button and drift back to sleep, you force your brain to start a new sleep cycle that is 90 to 110 minutes long. When the “snooze” alarm goes off 15 minutes later, the cortical region of your brain, which is the part of the brain responsible for decision-making, attention, alertness, and self-control, is still in the sleep cycle. It won’t be able to snap awake—it needs 75 more minutes to finish what that snooze button started. It can take up to four hours for this “sleep inertia” condition to wear off and for your cognitive functions to return to their full capacity. That’s why you feel so darn groggy when you get up after hitting the snooze. It’s not because you didn’t get enough sleep. It’s because once you hit the snooze button, you started a new sleep cycle and then interrupted it. On days when you hit the snooze button, there’s no way you’re at your best. So, I’m dead serious about this. The alarm goes off. No snooze button. Get up. Not negotiable." (Chapter:10. Increase Productivity)
- "I use the 3 to 5 minutes of time that I spend washing my face and brushing and flossing my teeth to focus my thoughts on what I really want and need to do for ME and MY big-picture goals. This is not a to-do list. This is a “must list.” It’s a moment when I consciously collect my thoughts and think of one or two things I might not feel like doing but that I must do today—for my goals, dreams, and business growth. Researchers call these SMART goals (Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, Timely). " (Chapter:10. Increase Productivity)
- "5. I write down my 1 to 3 “musts” and why they are important. In my cheapo daily planner that I bought at an office supply store, I jot down the one, two, or three things that I feel I must do today—that are for ME. There are a couple of reasons why this is an important step: one, because I am a visual person, and two, according to research by Dominican University of California psychology professor Dr. Gail Matthews, by simply writing down your goals, you are 42% more likely to achieve them." (Chapter:10. Increase Productivity)
- "I plan and often execute the most important “musts” FIRST, before I check my phone or go online and check email. I do this using a tool I call “30 before 7:30 a.m.”" (Chapter:10. Increase Productivity)
- "Here’s something else I learned from research. In addition to planning my day, I also plan the time I will stop working. That’s right. Every day, when I start my day, I determine what time I will stop working and hang out with my family. Having a deadline for stopping or redirecting does two things: it makes me more intentional with the time I have and that makes me more productive. There’s a principle called Parkinson’s Law—work expands to whatever time you give it. So give your workday a deadline. A deadline is important for stamina and mental health. It forces you to focus and be serious about taking the break from work. It’s a break that we all need to be present with our families and give our brains the time to rest, recharge, and reset that they require. I’m not going to lie, I’ve had to use the rule to force myself 5- 4- 3- 2- 1 to turn off the computer to stop working for the day more often than I would like to admit." (Chapter:10. Increase Productivity)
- "Productive procrastination was a hugely liberating concept for me to learn, especially while struggling to write this book. Before I learned about productive procrastination, I beat myself up constantly because I kept feeling burnt out, I had writer’s block, and I thought it meant I was a bad writer, lazy, or incapable. In truth, a creative process of this magnitude just took time. My mind needed breaks and time to wander. It took me seven months longer than I thought it would to finish and the book is 100 times better for it. If you’re not getting the results that you want, give the project some time, go focus your energy somewhere else, and then come back later with fresh eyes." (Chapter:11. End Procrastination)
- "main thing driving procrastination is not avoiding work. It’s avoiding stress. Procrastination is “a subconscious desire to feel good right now” so you can feel a little stress relief." (Chapter:11. End Procrastination)
- "Our “future self” is the person that we want to become. Interestingly, research proves that when you can picture the “Future You,” it gives you the objectivity to push yourself in the present moment. In experiments when researchers show people their own pictures digitally aged, they’re more likely to save for retirement. I guess that’s an explanation for why vision boards work." (Chapter:11. End Procrastination)
