---
id: "smfarcZiVa9ldtieXYCRb"
title: "'Quotes #28'"
desc: ''
updated: "1639980716962"
created: "1638120443928"
date: "2021-11-28"
categories: 
  - "research"
date: "'2018-07-07'"
categories:
  - research
---

- What should we expect from these guys? Jamie is smart. He doesn't have as much cash to work with since he bought Bear. Lloyd's a superstar. Goldman's the smartest shop on the block. And just because I used to be his boss, it doesn't mean he's gonna listen to me. John Mack used to run around the floor screaming, "there's blood in the water! Let's go kill someone!" He's a fighter. Thain was my number two at Goldman. He's selfish. He's a pragmatist. He knows-- if Lehman goes, Merrill's next. Vikram Pandit is the new guy at Citigroup. No one knows if he's running Citi or if Citi's running him.
- Kohli: "i try but woh agr khatm hogaya In the last 10 years have you ever woken up not feeling 150% passionate cause I believe you wake up feeling 150% passionate every day when you go to play. - Everyone has off days. - Ive woken up feeling a sense of detachment from what Im doing. Thinking that I dont want to do this. But that has been because of excessive pressure thats been on me during a difficult phase. But still, Ive had the ability to still tell myself no. I’ll go out and try once morehe day you lose the will to go out and try once more then you can’t do anything and No one can convince youo chance. So what is the motivation? Motivation is just about winning. The day I lose my passion, I’ll stop playing."
- My mother used to say, “It’s the exception that proves the rule.” She meant, for example, the fact that only a tiny number of people can do something proves that most people can’t.
- Things may to come to those who wait but only the things left by people who hustle.
- If awareness shapes the outer boundary of what is possible in the life of a person, then the ability to operate effec
tively within such a boundary determines the probability that they will. The reason that this relates to agency is that, ultimately, your awareness is what determines your beliefs and establishes the boundaries of what you perceive to be possible. This in turn directly impacts the daily decisions you make about what to do with yourself. If you read any biography of a prominent person, there will almost undoubtedly be a mention of an event or an instance that completely changed how they approached their lives. Sometimes, it’s a brush with mortality, but other times, it’s something as simple as realizing that maybe the rules they had always assumed to be facts weren’t actually set in stone. We all have these pivots of awareness that shift our perspective about what is real and what is important and what is worth doing. We can’t intellectualize them beforehand because they require first-hand exposure through experience. They expand agency by redefining possibility.
- I am not what i think i am, i am not what you think i am, i am what i think you think i am
- Pessimists sound smart. Optimists make money —natfriedman