---
id: "sioiDOTe7A7warNFOFJuo"
title: "'For My Kids #1'"
desc: ''
updated: "1636922485756"
created: "1636922485756"
date: "2021-11-15"
categories: 
  - "research"
date: "'2016-02-02'"
---

Hey Kids! I am glad I'm doing this. For a bit of intro this is me 19 years old, in college, literally in bed right now while Grandpop's and grandma are in the next room watching something on YouTube. I wonder what would be the next big thing in your time....

The reason behind me doing this is that I don't want you to ever get lost, more importantly learn a bit about my life experiences, things which I may lose with time to pass onto you all.

Here's something I found very helpful throughout my life:

> Rocky Balboa: "Let me tell you something you already know. The world ain't all sunshine and rainbows. It's a very mean and nasty place and I don't care how tough you are it will beat you to your knees and keep you there permanently if you let it. You, me, or nobody is gonna hit as hard as life. But it ain't about how hard you're hit. It's about how hard you can get it and keep moving forward. How much you can take and keep moving forward. That's how winning is done! Now if you know what you're worth then go out and get what you're worth. But ya gotta be willing to take the hits, and not pointing fingers saying you ain't where you wanna be because of him, or her, or anybody! Cowards do that and that ain't you!"

Yeah! I know that's pretty lame..:p But there will be times when you would be at zenith and then downsides will arrive and at those moments I want you to remember and reconcile it. Why the fuck? Because these things give you hope and trust me on this If there's will, hope, and you believe that you can pull this off, no matter how crazy that thing is, no matter what people around you think of it, if you believe it you will conquer it eventually.

Ok, here's my lessons learnt from today:

Socialising is as important as possessing deep knowledge, to be honest I'm kind of a shy person but not introvert, I take time to get frank with people.

Whenever you speak, speak confidently, no matter how dumb that things is. During my school time, about 2 years ago, I was in a class debate. At that point the opposition had put a very good point and what I did in that very moment changed a significant part of my beliefs. I randomly named some scientists as Leonard Hofstader (character in 1 of my favourite TV series - The Big Bang Theory) and more amusing part is that they took this shit and believed it....Result: "I won!"

Read: "This is one thing I regret, wishing I could have started this earlier. I know there are children who call you bookworms.....well in my time, here, some are present but you know what...fuck off, I don't care. It's one thing you should follow. Why? It diversifies your perspective about things, be it life or your knowledge. Reading 10 books is like living 10 different and wise lives apart from your own beautiful one!!"

So that's for tonight, need to study...Godspeed!

Got a dream? Go get it!
