---
id: "Ms78GPoCNBMLbkXKNWkFo"
title: "Book Notes Ahead of the Curve Two Years at Harvard Business School Philip Delves Broughton"
desc: ''
updated: "1636922485815"
created: "1636922485815"
date: "2021-11-15"
categories: 
  - "research"
date: "'2018-03-06'"
categories:
  - research
---

- My experience of Linda and Gunther convinced me that it took just two consultants to screw up a project. One to drive everyone insane, and the other to laugh at her PowerPoint jokes.
- Every organization has one. They’re always the ones who can never stay on point, but they insist that everyone listen to them in silence.”
- HBS is not about letting everyone do everything. It is about forcing you to make choices.
- What are your ambitions? What are your obligations? Do they tally? If not, what should you do to change one or the other? How should you spend your time to get what you want?
- Mormons, Military, and McKinsey.
- Far better it is to dare mighty things, to win glorious triumphs even though checkered by failure, than to rank with those poor spirits who neither enjoy nor suffer much because they live in the gray twilight that knows neither victory nor defeat. —THEODORE ROOSEVELT,
- the model for Sir Lawrence Wildman, Gordon Gekko’s English nemesis in the movie Wall Street.
- As I was escorted out by his secretary, a door in the wood paneling creaked open and I glimpsed a small conference room where a man and a woman, both immaculate and beautiful, were sitting at their laptops and chatting. They looked toward me and smiled and continued their conversation. The secretary said, “Mr. Cisneros only hires Harvard MBAs to work in his private office.” I felt I had been given a glimpse of a better world. Several of my friends had obtained MBAs, mostly from INSEAD, a school just outside Paris, and spoke well of their experience. The few who had been to HBS were dismissive of it. They mocked its self-importance, the earnestness of the students, the very opposite of British insouciance. All, however, said that the MBA had taught them the language of business. For that they were grateful.
- Stanford is known as a place for Silicon Valley entrepreneurs. Kellogg, at Northwestern University, is famous for marketing. If your dream is to build or manage a great American brand, Kellogg is the place. Wharton, at the University of Pennsylvania, is for financiers, those with their eyes fixed on Wall Street. Columbia is similarly plugged into all that happens in New York. The Sloan School, at MIT, is for engineers and scientists wanting to turn their ideas into businesses. And Harvard is about general management. It prepares you to manage and lead all the parts of a business without any particular specialization. These descriptions doubtless do all of these schools a disservice, but they are repeated so often that an applicant, forced to choose, can scarcely ignore them.
- It was one of the great money-makers of his time, however, who put up the money for these buildings. George F. Baker, the president of the First National Bank, had been a towering figure on Wall Street for sixty years by the time the business school’s fund-raisers came knocking. Along with J. P. Morgan, he had financed the Gilded Age boom of the late nineteenth century and acted as the de facto U.S. Treasury at a time when Washington’s financial expertise was negligible. He was also famously taciturn, hence his nickname The Sphinx. Baker once said, “\[B\]usiness men of America should reduce their talk two- thirds . . . There is rarely ever a reason good enough for anybody to talk.”
- Steenburgh told us that people believe anything in sales meetings. The challenge is to be skeptical once you’ve left.
- The second mantra was: "Accounting = Economic truth + Measurement error"
- Virtual study groups would jeopardize the entire process of repeated decision-making, discussing, and dealing with uncertainty that we were there to learn. It was the human interaction that made HBS so unique and the administration’s relentless focus on this process that gave the education its heft.
- Before arriving at Harvard, we were required to take two personality tests. The first was the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator, the second was called CareerLeader. B The Myers-Briggs Type Indicator is intended to help one think about one’s own psychological type and consequently how to use that understanding in everyday life. It is used on the employees of most of the Fortune 100 companies and some 2.5 million Americans each year, and is the closest business gets to issuing bar codes to personalities.
- He further identified two different ways of perceiving, sensation and intuition. Sensing is about practicalities, the immediate, the facts staring one in the face. Intuition is about imagination, inspiration, the wild blue yonder. Judging could also come in two forms, thinking, a rational approach, and feeling, acting on hunches. Jung then went on to state that people also tend to be energized either by the external world of people and experience, or the internal world of thought, memory, and emotion. He labeled these two tendencies extraversion and introversion. Each person, he argued, was either extroverted or introverted and was characterized by one of the perception or judging functions, one of which would be dominant, the other auxiliary. This led him to conclude that there are sixteen basic personality types.
- "Far better it is to dare mighty things, to win glorious triumphs even though checkered by failure, than to rank with those poor spirits who neither enjoy nor suffer much because they live in the gray twilight that knows neither victory nor defeat. —THEODORE ROOSEVELT, "
- "It was a biography of the British billionaire Sir James Goldsmith. He had built his fortune over many years in all kinds of ways. As a teenager he incurred large gambling debts, which his father had to pay off. He came to national attention in Britain at the age of twenty when he eloped with the eighteen-year-old daughter of a Bolivian tin magnate. Their escapade was lapped up by the newspapers. When Goldsmith’s wife died giving birth to their first child, he turned serious about his work. He was opportunistic, buying and selling pharmaceutical and food companies, frequently risking bankruptcy. His financing was the subject of frequent media investigations. Then, in the 1980s, his moment truly arrived. Using junk bonds, Goldsmith borrowed, bought, and asset-stripped his way to a great fortune. He was Designed by Trung Pham Tuan - 32 - http://phamtuantrung.tk What They Teach You at Harvard Business School the model for Sir Lawrence Wildman, Gordon Gekko’s English nemesis in the movie Wall Street. Shortly before the markets crashed in October 1987, Goldsmith sold everything he had and retired to the palace he was building for himself on Mexico’s Pacific Coast. He appeared on the cover of Time magazine above the headline “The Lucky Gambler.” Goldsmith’s life, as his biographer described it, was a grand adventure, full of risk, daring, and rich human encounters. Nothing like business as I had previously understood it. It got me thinking. "
- "Several of my friends had obtained MBAs, mostly from INSEAD, a school just outside Paris, and spoke well of their experience. The few who had been to HBS were dismissive of it. They mocked its self-importance, the earnestness of the students, the very opposite of British insouciance."
- "All, however, said that the MBA had taught them the language of business. For that they were grateful. So, in August 2001, in a gray, windowless cubicle in an office tower close to Penn Station, I took the GMAT, the standardized test in English and math required for graduate business school. I waited a few moments for a computer to spit out my score: 730 out of 800. The average for Harvard was 700. I could do this. "
- "in the United States, it is even more so overseas. It remains, for better or worse, by far the best-known university in America. The second reason was the particular education the business school promised. Even though most business schools teach much the same stuff, the approach and emphasis vary. Among the top schools, Stanford is known as a place for Silicon Valley entrepreneurs. Kellogg, at Northwestern University, is famous for marketing. If your dream is to build or manage a great American brand, Kellogg is the place. Wharton, at the University of Pennsylvania, is for financiers, those with their eyes fixed on Wall Street. Columbia is similarly plugged into all that happens in New York. The Sloan School, at MIT, is for engineers and scientists wanting to turn their ideas into businesses. And Harvard is about general management. It prepares you to manage and lead all the parts of a business without any particular specialization. These descriptions doubtless do all of these schools a disservice, but they are repeated so often that an applicant, forced to choose, can scarcely ignore them. "
- "The questions were of three kinds: Why do you want to come to business school? Why do you want to come to this business school? And what have you done in your life up to now that makes you think a business education at this school would be worth your time and ours? As "
- "You can put networking on the bottom of your to-do list, and you’ll still end up with a stellar network of friends. That’s the real power behind the famous HBS network—international, multi-industry friendships that last.” "
- Our first case was about Benihana, the Japanese-inspired restaurant chain. We saw how its founder had deconstructed the mechanics of restaurants to create something unique and highly profitable. By having chefs prepare food at the tables, he could cut back on kitchen space. Customers were rotated in and out of the restaurant at speed. A limited menu meant far less waste. And all of this was packaged and offered up as entertainment, with chefs spinning their knives as they sliced up vegetables and meat and cooked them right in front of the diners. It gave one a strange feeling of power to be able to peel back a business as elemental as a restaurant and see where in the process of serving food one could make and lose money. Later in the semester, I learned a term for that delusional sense of authority, the sense that after a few TOM classes I could reengineer the operations of any business put before "me." It was called Beginnihana.
- Sensing is about practicalities, the immediate, the facts staring one in the face. Intuition is about imagination, inspiration, the wild blue yonder.
- she said, groups went through four phases: "“formin’, stormin’,normin’, and performin’.” “We’re clearly still stormin’,”"
- The problem with such a handy little way of assigning risk and reward is that some of the greatest investors in the world consider it trivial. Warren Buffett, for example, is the anti-beta. Buffett’s argument goes something like this: "Imagine a perfectly good company with strong revenues, low costs, and a sustainable competitive advantage. Its stock trades at an earnings multiple just above its peers. Then, one day, the chief executive is found in bed with a sheep. It turns out he has been using company money to amuse both himself and his sheep. The chief executive is humiliated, and the company becomes a nationwide joke. The stock price plummets in relation to the market. For reasons that have nothing to do with the company’s fundamental performance, it suddenly looks like a high-beta stock—volatile and risky. But for the value investor like Buffett, an investment in the company just became dramatically less risky. The stock is now cheap and will more than likely recover ground, as the company is still appreciated by its customers, giving the investor a higher return for pretty much the same company-specific risk as existed before the sheep incident. The key is to keep your focus on the price of the stock in relation to the future cash flows it will generate. How that price has moved historically, either in absolute or relative terms, is all but irrelevant. Focusing on beta is a near-certain way of denying yourself alpha, the true measure of greatness."
- But it was when Whitman turned to career advice that I could see everyone in the room perking up, waiting for “the secret.” “You’re never as good as you think you are. But you’re probably never as bad as you think you are,” she said, before going on to elaborate her nine-point personal philosophy. The first point is to do something you enjoy, because if you don’t enjoy it you’re unlikely to be any good at it. Second, deliver the results, whatever you’re doing. Third, codify the lessons learned. Since HBS, she said, she had experienced 1.5 successes, 1.5 failures, and 1 gigantic home run. Fourth, be patient and stick around good people and good things. Fifth, build a team and share credit. Sixth, be fun to work with. Seventh, ask what you don’t know or understand. Eighth, don’t take yourself too seriously. Ninth, never, ever compromise your integrity.
- The best advice on choosing a career, Buffett said, was to find something you loved. After that, the money would seem unimportant. He said he drank the same sodas as us and ate the same fast food, though he got a discount at Dairy Queen because he owned it. He slept on the same kind of mattress, which meant for at least seven hours in the day we were no less comfortable than he. The only real difference, he said, was that “I fly differently.”The evening before my first interview, the California firm held a get-to-know-you dinner at an Alsatian restaurant off Harvard Square. Thirty of us crowded into a basement room, tricked out like a German Stube . You could spot the executives by their gleaming white shirts and the fact that they were throwing back red wine while the rest of us sipped delicately at soda water. I was seated opposite a fund manager who had bristling silver hair and a burning red shaving rash all over the lower half of his skeletal face. He was a caricature of dissatisfaction. His breath, which worsened with every gulp of Merlot and slice of roast duck, was paint stripper and his humor barbed. He told us he was a technology consultant for years before achieving his dream of stock-picking for a living. “I lived and breathed stocks,” he said, staring at me goggleeyed. “That’s the only way to do this. I read every book I could. I learned about every company I could. I didn’t go to business school. There were no short-cuts for "me." I ran my own portfolio while I was working and kept on applying for these jobs until finally I got this one.” He asked us how many of the cases we read in preparation for class. All of them, I told him. Two Indian men at the table said they read only one in three or one in five at the most. I could not tell if they were joking, but they said that they had better things to do with their time at HBS than read sloppy marketing and LEAD cases. For example, they liked to play poker five nights a week. The fund manager seemed to like this. With dessert came a shuffling of places and another of the executives came and sat at our table. He and his colleague began to trade war stories while sloshing back more wine. “Did you see Howie just played Pebble Beach? Howie runs our media fund. He’s the guy who bumped off the CEO of AOL. Brilliant guy. Legend. Beats the market every year. Never misses. Twenty years straight. Rupert Murdoch calls him for advice. I mean, the guy’s a legend. He bought Viacom at ten!” Away from home with nothing to do but interview students, they were wallowing in their fully expensed trip, ordering more wine, more chocolate ganache with raspberry sauce, swapping more war stories. “So Bill was reading the financial statements—Bill’s our head retail analyst, guys—and he noticed that inventory had just gone through the roof and same-store sales were lagging. They were just piling up crap in the stores and no one was buying, but it was still seen as this hot company, right? So he started unloading the thing. No one else had seen it and he got out before the stock tanked thirty percent. Unbelievable.”
- They were probably writing “half-wit.”
- “You’ve got to have a super strong conviction about what you want to do here,” he said, resting one soccer boot on my shoulder. “You know what finally stopped me chasing these things? It was hearing about the grilling people were getting for these stupid summer jobs. For people like you and me, the old guys, it’s too undignified.” Luis had decided he would go home to Madrid and spend the summer helping an American online travel company that was seeking to crack the European market. “I’ll be able to do it on my own time,” he said. “No boss.”
- Annette, also from the section, had performed the most stunning volte-face. She had arrived at HBS with a scholarship from a top investment bank, which was paying for her tuition and had guaranteed her a summer job and a job when she graduated. But the prospect of returning to Wall Street tortured her. “I knew that if I went back, that was it,” she told "me." “I would be there for the rest of my career. The money and status are very addictive.” Instead, she wanted to get out of financial services and into a company with a real, physical product to sell. She had received an offer from a fashion house to work in their marketing department over the summer. The money was half of what the bank was offering. And if she took the fashion job, she would forfeit her scholarship and more than sixty thousand dollars in tuition grants. “I did what I always do when I face a dilemma,” she said. “I locked myself away and just forced myself to make a decision. I had to leave finance.”
- We were not being trained to be excellent financiers or operations managers but rather good generals. We were learning how to marshal disparate forces and resources to pursue the goals of creating and capturing as much value as possible. Strategy was not about filing the right accounts or making sure the machinery worked. It dealt with the big picture: "building and managing a business to make superior returns over the long term. The first thing to understand about strategy, we learned, is that it is not operational efficiency. You could run the best laundry in the world, but if what you were doing was quite simple and thousands of others could do it, you were not going to make any money. You lacked, as Felix liked to say, “a great strategy.” A beautifully run restaurant with the greatest chef in the world could be an economic disaster, while owning a few grubby fast-food franchises could make you a millionaire. Being very good at doing something was absolutely no guarantee of financial success. I recalled Steenburgh in marketing telling us, “A good product alone won’t get you there.” So the first challenge for the strategist was picking the right thing to do. Felix showed us a graph of the distribution of returns on equity of major American companies over the past twenty years. Most returned between 10 and 15 percent a year. But a few had returns on equity over 20 percent. What were they doing that enabled them to do this? The most profitable companies year after year tended to be in a few sectors: "pharmaceuticals, high-technology, financial services, discount department stores, and oil. The worst major industry to be in was airlines. There were exceptions, such as Southwest, which had done phenomenally well. But even Southwest, we had to assume, would eventually struggle to escape the broader trends of its industry. Picking the right industry, one with a sound structure, where your chances of making a profit were highest, was where good strategy began."
- In 1980, a Harvard Business School professor called Michael Porter published an article, “What Is Strategy?,” that laid out the five forces he believed determined a company’s ability to capture value. They are: "barriers to entry, supplier power, customer power, substitutes, and rivalry. Understanding the five forces allowed you to see why the well-run laundry or the wonderful restaurant floundered, while a shoddily run muffler store flourished. The five forces are the cornerstone of modern strategic thinking. Take the laundry. The barriers to entry are relatively low. It does not require highly skilled labor, and almost anyone could buy a small Laundromat with a bank loan. This is why so many immigrants run laundries. When you are new to the country, laundries are simple businesses to acquire and run. If you speak little English, have a little money, and are prepared to work hard, laundries make sense as a first entrepreneurial endeavor. But you must expect a lot of competition from people with the same idea and the same access to the opportunity. The suppliers to the laundry are the companies that make laundry machines and cleaning products. There are plenty of both, which keeps down prices and provides you with options should you decide to change. The bad news is your customers. In big cities, there tend to be laundries on almost every street corner, offering identical services and prices. If one laundry wrecks your shirts, you can easily go to another. The only cost of switching from one to the other might be a slightly longer walk. The main substitute for a laundry service is the washer-dryer at ho"me." In Manhattan, many apartment buildings do not allow people to have washer-dryers in their homes, which forces them out to laundries. If that rule were to change and everyone were permitted a washer-dryer, the laundries would be in deep trouble. The degree of competitive rivalry among laundries is stoked by all of these forces—low barriers to entry, weak suppliers, powerful customers, and substitutes in the market where the business is located. The five-forces analysis provides a good idea of a firm’s competitive advantage over its rivals, and hence its chances of relative success. It came in two flavors: either you had a cost advantage, whereby you made things cheaper and sold them cheaper, or you differentiated your product somehow, either by making it better than your rivals or by designing it differently to appeal to a different group of people. These two forms of differentiation were known as vertical or horizontal: vertical meant better or worse; horizontal meant different."
- Success tends to breed complacency, which is why Bill Gates keeps a photograph of Henry Ford in his office. It reminds him that however pioneering and successful you are, you have to keep innovating and protecting your competitive advantage or else a rival will defeat you, as General Motors eventually defeated Ford.
- Having established the goal of sustainable competitive advantage, the strategist’s next task is to develop and integrate a consistent set of mutually reinforcing activities. The aim is not to have the greatest marketing department in the world but, rather, the best marketing department for your company. You want to build a system in which every activity, including marketing, supports the others. It is the difference between having great individual players and a great team. Wal-Mart’s magic is not just in its low costs and low prices. It also has a frugal corporate culture, low store-construction costs in rural and suburban locations, limited advertising, a stellar logistics operation, no unions, a stranglehold on suppliers, who depend on it to sell colossal volumes of their product, and top-notch technology and inventory tracking. It is the integration of all of this that makes Wal-Mart successful and so hard to replicate. And the more it does what it does, the better it gets, making life for its rivals all but impossible.
- The notion of “the more you practice the better you get” is known as the learning curve and was first observed by business academics during the Second World War. The more factories produced military aircraft, the faster the planes came off the production line and the better they were. Companies that move up the learning curve fastest tend to do better than their rivals.
- A similar flywheel effect can be set in motion for willingness to pay. The more people bought Apple’s iPods, the more people wanted them. To reach this audience, music companies made their entire catalogues available on iTunes. Consumers downloaded more and more music, making their iPods even more precious. When rival device makers tried to enter the market, they found they were not just competing on the quality of their device but also taking on the entire ecosystem that Apple had created. Cheaper devices of equal quality failed in the market because people were ready to pay more for an iPod for its familiarity, the cool brand association, and its compatibility with iTunes and other Apple products. Apple had built a sustainable competitive advantage.
- Finally, we moved to issues of scope. What should our business do? What should it own? Where should it operate? The value test, we learned, should be applied when considering whether you or someone else is better off owning a particular business. General Electric demands that its separate businesses be ranked one or two in whatever sector they operate. If they are ranked lower and cannot be improved, GE assumes it is not the best owner for that company and sells. The ownership test asks whether your business needs to own a certain asset to create value. McDonald’s decided long ago that it was far better off selling franchises and then servicing them than owning millions of parcels of real estate. A fashion designer does not need to own the factories that produce her clothes, provided she can be sure the clothes will be made to her specifications. Sound contracts and long-term relationships, Felix explained, could be far less hassle than ownership.
- After integration, the strategist must next consider the reactions of his company’s competitors. If I do this, what will my rival do? At HBS we were introduced to game theory as a means of analyzing the consequences of a competitive situation. In its simplest form, game theory involved understanding the financial consequences of a decision for two parties. If Bill opens a new store to compete with Bob, what should Bob do? Should he close his store or compete with Bill? What will be the costs to Bob of competing versus closing? What will be the costs to Bob if Bill decides to stick around? Mapping out these options and applying values to their consequences offers an aid to decision making rather than a specific answer. It is another means of making the best decision with incomplete information, the main goal of our two-year course.
- One of the most remarkable companies we studied was called Li and Fung, which was founded in 1906 in Canton as a trading company, helping English and American merchants get access to Chinese factories. Based in Hong Kong, it now managed the supply chains for many of the world’s largest retailers and manufacturers. In 1976, Victor Fung, the grandson of the founder and a professor at HBS, returned to Hong Kong to take over the firm. He and his younger brother, William, a Harvard MBA, decided to expand the scope of the company’s operations. Instead of being an intermediary between foreign companies and Hong Kong suppliers, Li and Fung built relationships throughout Taiwan, Korea, Singapore, and eventually deeper into China. It went from simply fulfilling customer requests to developing unique production programs that allowed manufacturers to create products of a quality and cost they never thought possible. If you wanted shirts made in Asia, Li and Fung would know separate places for cotton, buttons, and stitching and be able to move the unfinished product from one place to another and still deliver it cheaper than if you had picked a single factory. They called what they did “dispersed manufacturing,” and their staff, “little John Waynes,” because they spent their days “standing in the middle of the wagon train, shooting at all the bad guys.”
- “Have you seen the cars in the garage?” I asked him that morning. “Yes.” Vivek only ever answered the specific question you asked him. “Well, how come I’m driving a two-thousand-dollar Toyota and everyone else has a BMW?” “Lots of people buy them when they get into HBS and want to get financial aid.” “What?” “Once you get accepted by HBS, you want to clear out your bank account so that you get more financial aid.” “I’m sorry, I’m not getting this. You buy a BMW to get financial aid?” “When you list your assets in the financial aid application, you don’t have to mention your car, but you do have to list any savings or property. So you buy a car for twenty thousand dollars, maybe you get an extra twenty thousand dollars in financial aid, so basically HBS buys you a BMW. If you hadn’t bought the car, you’d have to pay the twenty thousand dollars out of your savings.” “But don’t they check this kind of thing? I thought that if you were caught lying on your financial aid form, you could risk losing your place.” “But this isn’t lying. Nor is taking all your money and parking it with your parents while you apply for financial aid.” “So your personal accounts look empty.” “Right.” “This is unbelievable. How many people do this?” “Everyone coming from Wall Street knows about this. And the consulting firms. It doesn’t always work. But lots of people try it.”The negotiator’s role was often to mislead his opponent, passively at least, while remaining ethical. The risk of unethical negotiation was a bad reputation, which would hurt you in future negotiations. Under U.S. law, negotiators had no duty of good faith, but fraud carried heavy consequences. Bluffing was fine. Knowingly misrepresenting facts to damage another party was not. The sophistication of the parties was also relevant. Selling a complicated financial product to an economic illiterate and then blaming the illiterate for not understanding the contract would hurt you in court. There were basically three schools of negotiators: "the poker player, who regards it all as a game; the idealist, who insists on doing the right thing every time; and the pragmatist, who knows that what goes around comes around. We were introduced to two concepts every good negotiator should know ether or not they use these terms): BATNA and ZOPA. BATNA is the “best alternative to a negotiated agreement.” Knowing your BATNA prevents you from making a bad deal. If the negotiation is going poorly, you know what your options are if it collapses or you decide to walk away. ZOPA is the “zone of possible agreement,” the range of scenarios you and your opponent are likely to agree upon. You should have a pretty clear idea of both your BATNA and ZOPA even before your negotiation begins. The gifted negotiator adopts a threedimensional perspective, working both at the table and away from it, understanding the personalities involved, investigating relentlessly to grasp the complete range of interests, and then crafting a strategy, including everything from the venue and the timing all the way through to the financial calculations. If the negotiations stall, the negotiator should “go to the balcony” to gain perspective and then try to reframe the issues, moving from defensive positions to shared interests, from hostility to problemsolving. Then he can set about “building a golden bridge” from his position to his goal. Power, we were told, was a tool to be used to educate the other party rather than to escalate the intensity."
- Anybody who thinks money will make you happy hasn’t got money.
- New MBAs joining a top private equity firm such as Blackstone, KKR, Texas Pacific Group, or Bain Capital, could expect to earn $400,000 in their first year. First-year investment bankers, by contrast, could expect maybe half of that, provided everything went well. To exacerbate the bankers’ inferiority, they knew they would probably have to spend most of their time raising money and pitching ideas for their friends in private equity. Investment banking was considered a second-tier career. You could earn $200,000 a year straight out of school, and your peers would still think you had failed.Students would talk about how much more interesting it was to acquire and run companies than simply to provide banking services. Private equity gave you an ownership stake that investment banking did not. The principle/agent problem of how to align the interests of managers and employees with shareholders to maximize performance came closer to being solved by the private equity model in which managers and owners were more tightly linked. But, as usual, the money was the main attraction, and the money came courtesy of debt. It took me several months at HBS to disabuse myself of the notion that debt was a bad thing. Hasan shared my problem. “I come from a culture where borrowing is shameful. You want to die debt-free,” he told "me." “But here I keep learning about the power of leverage, how to raise money and structure your financing deal. Suddenly everything is possible.” Debt, we found, is the fuel of modern finance. It provides the opportunity of astonishing returns. It allows you to seize control of assets you could otherwise not afford and then slap them around for cash. Debt focuses the mind and forces people to concentrate on the only thing that matters: "the cash flowing out of the business. If Gordon Gekko were speaking today, he might have to reword his classic boast about greed. These days debt, for want of a better word, is good. Debt works. It had become a running joke in our section that if we ever discussed a company struggling to increase its value, members of the skydeck would start pumping their arms up and down as if jacking up a car. It was the sign to “lever up,” to load up the balance sheet with debt."
- The humiliation is compounded when your company receives a bill from the private equity firm charging you for its consulting services. If you don’t have the money to pay, they might suggest, how about taking on some more debt? It’s cheap, after all. The government pays for a chunk of it by allowing you to charge interest as an expense. And it will enhance the returns on equity. “But I’ve fired everyone I can fire!” the manager screams. “I’ve moved from our lovely old offices to this soul-wrecking office park. No one in my town talks to me anymore. I’ve outsourced everything humanly possible to China. There is nothing left but the trickle of cash, no life, no humanity, no higher purpose.” “Mission accomplished. Time to sell,” says the man in rimless spectacles in his office overlooking Central Park.Now the “improved” company is floated on the stock exchange. The private equity investor recouped his original investment months ago, perhaps even doubled it in fees and financial chicanery. And now he gets another bite. The market now regards the company as “turned around”— more efficient, trimmed of fat and waste, and ready to grow again. If the investor bought it for $1 billion and can sell it for $3 billion, the $2 billion is all his, plus, of course, his original equity investment. Even better, the tax rate on returns from private equity investment is lower than the standard corporate tax rate. Is it any wonder so many want to be in this business?
- And the juicing opportunities just keep on coming. Now you have bought your company, which up until recently was quietly going about its business making lots of cash and avoiding taking on debt. You take the debt you incurred and dump it onto your acquisition. If possible, you then take even more debt and pay yourself a large management fee. If at all possible, this will equal or exceed the amount of cash you yourself put into the deal. Already you have recouped your investment. Piling debt onto some poor company carries the innocuous term “leveraging the balance sheet.” For the acquired company, the horror show is just beginning. Your sole focus now is to generate cash to keep up those interest payments. Such discipline, your investors will keep telling you from their lavish offices in New York, is vital to success. It will result in a better-run, more profitable company that two or three years down the line can be sold at a huge profit. First, you strip your headquarters down to its bare essentials, removing any perks or visible signs of comfort. You gut your health plan and sack loyal employees so as to keep up with those crushing interest payments. Then along comes a team of consultants from your private equity investor, sharpsuited number crunchers booked into the local Four Seasons, who tell you to keep turning the ratchet. Those who do so, they promise, will be handsomely rewarded— this is known as “aligning the interests of management and investors.” But all it really means is forcing management to be loyal first and foremost to its equity holders—no matter that those equity holders plan to be in and out of their investment within a few years.
- Rubenstein looked like any other Wall Street elder statesman, in a blue pinstriped suit and owlish tortoiseshell glasses. But the moment he spoke, he revealed a droll, self-deprecating wit. The difference between corporate leaders and those who start their own businesses, I had observed, was startling. The latter come across as so much smarter and independent-minded, so much less prone to platitudes, so much more comfortable in their own skins. There seems to be an anarchic streak in anyone who has taken a real risk in his life. And even when it has to burn its way through a pinstriped suit, it shows. The entrepreneurs who came to campus—from hedge fund pioneers such as Richard Perry; to Barry Diller, the media baron and founder of IAC; to Paul Orfalea, the founder of Kinko’s—seemed to be both enamored of their own skills and hard work and appreciative of the luck it had taken for them to succeed. Despite being dogged, competitive Darwinian types, they were more understanding of the world and its insanity, somehow more forgiving. They reminded me of generals who had experienced war, while all the corporate stiffs and consultants and lawyers and bankers were like the politicians who sent men into battle, with no grasp of the consequences.I mention all this in the context of Rubenstein because he was so unexpected. It was easy to spot the entrepreneur when he arrived wearing a fleece pullover and jeans, and drinking coffee from a recyclable cup.
- Most industries have their creation myths, from Alexander Graham Bell and the telephone to Larry Page and Sergey Brin building the prototype for Google in the Stanford computer department. The private equity industry was fathered by an intemperate old banker and former Treasury secretary, William Simon. In 1982, Simon and a partner, Raymond Chambers, purchased the Gibson Greetings Card Company from RCA. The price was $81 million. Simon and Chambers put in $1 million in cash, borrowed $53 million, and paid for the rest through a scheme whereby Gibson sold much of its property and then leased it back. This was a case of extreme leverage, but Simon knew what he was doing. RCA was keen to unload the company in order to concentrate on its other businesses. The stock market was about to emerge from a prolonged slump. And there were efficiencies to be wrung out of Gibson. A mere eighteen months later, Simon and Chambers floated Gibson on the stock market with an IPO itial public offering), raising $290 million. Simon had turned his personal investment of $330,000 into a holding worth $70 million.Returns like that never go unnoticed. Rubenstein was soon scrambling to raise money and, more important, to find companies to buy. Carlyle’s specialty has been finding value in difficult situations, often using high-ranking political connections to lubricate deals. When he spoke to us everyone was obsessed with India and China, but Carlyle was already scouting out virgin territory in Africa.
- When it comes to business and government, he believed “you can have your cake and eat it.” There were two ways to do this. Either you started in government very young and then moved into business, or you made lots of money and then went into government. The useful thing about private equity, Rubenstein said, is “that you are highly compensated if you are reasonably successful. And even if you’re not that good, you’ll probably still make a fair amount of money, and with money comes freedom.” And with freedom, he added, came the opportunity to do interesting things.
- To his credit Rubenstein seemed generally unfazed by the industry that had made him so rich. Government, he said, had a far greater impact on the lives of others. “I had way too much of an impact at the age of twenty-seven.” In answer to the inevitable question about what qualities he sought in a job candidate, he said, “a reasonable degree of intelligence, a strong work ethic, the ability to get along with others, a desire to build something important, the ability to keep one’s ego in check.” His most important piece of career advice, though, was even simpler: "“be a principal or a decision maker, not a service provider.” Principals make all the money. They can turn the cell phones off on weekends. They are the ones for whom everyone else runs around. They possess the grail: control over their ti"me.""
- When Schwarzman started Blackstone, he suffered the agonies of anyone going their own way in business. “You have to really like pain and suffering,” he said. “Just because you start and make an announcement and assume they’ll come, they don’t co"me." Even if you sell, they don’t buy. Nine out of ten businesses that are started fail. If that’s the statistic, you know it’s not working for you. So to get from zero to some element of significant success, defined by yourself, you have to be exceptionally resilient.” It took him until his nineteenth meeting to find anyone who would invest money in Blackstone. It was the head of an insurance company’s investment fund, who pledged him $100 million over a tuna sandwich. Since then, Blackstone had invested more than $80 billion of investors’ money. “When you do things in life that have a good feeling,” Schwarzman says, “they tend to work out well, rather than having a great strategic plan.” The trick, of course, is actually trusting that good feeling in the face of a barrage of artfully constructed PowerPoint slides explaining why you’re crazy.
- Asked to explain his business, Schwarzman said, “We raise large amounts of money . . . and then we buy companies. Then we borrow three dollars for every dollar of equity in the deal.” He compared the search for companies to buy to dating. A lot of different factors lead to success. Part of it is figuring out how fast a company can grow and what can be done to assist that growth. And then there is the financing. How much debt could be loaded onto the company? How far could the operations be squeezed? To understand all of this, Schwarzman said, you need a combination of sharp analytical skills and a keen instinct for what will and won’t work, where you are in an economic cycle and, as he put it, “what’s gonna get you into trouble.” He compared his business to basketball, where the skill is not just repeatedly putting the ball in the hoop from one point on the court but, rather, being able to score from all over the court, being guarded by different people of different sizes and skills. Then, of course, there’s hard work, empathy, and “having a sense of where the world is going next.” But then even after all of this, he believed in a curious genetic predisposition to success. “There are some people who are constant winners in the game of life; from junior high school to high school and college, there are certain people who just have a knack for making things work in good times and bad times.” It was a version of Napoleon’s preference for a lucky general over a good one. They were the “talented tenth” who made the world run. For them, life’s challenges just toppled at the slightest touch. For others, it was one damn thing after another. Sitting atop his pile, with his wood sprite’s grin, Schwarzman left no doubt about what he saw in the mirror each morning. Life was a game of winners and losers. And there, staring back, was one humongous winner. Why wouldn’t we all want to be like Steve?
- The HBS definition of entrepreneurship was “the relentless pursuit of opportunity beyond resources currently controlled.”Our first case was a zinger. It was about an HBS alumnus called Bob Reiss who had made a small fortune from a Trivial Pursuitstyle game based on TV Guide. Reiss had spotted the growing popularity of Trivial Pursuit and in less than a year had struck a deal with TV Guide to create a game using television questions. He designed, packaged, and manufactured his game and put it onto shelves in time for Christmas, when it sold extremely well. His story was one of seizing an opportunity, gathering resources, and deploying them. He knew the right people to finance him and help create and sell the ga"me." It was breathtaking stuff and a change from all the stodgy corporations. By the end of the class, the entire section felt high on entrepreneurship.We were taught ways to analyze an opportunity and the different financing possibilities. We were taught to organize our thinking according to POCD, people, opportunity, context, deal. We examined the different skills necessary for starting a business and then managing it for growth. The importance of always having enough cash was beaten into us using the mantra of William Sahlman, HBS’s venture financing guru: "“More cash preferred to less cash. Cash sooner preferred to cash later. Certain cash preferred to risky cash. Never run out of cash.” At the end of the course, Gompers presented us with two quotations, the first from Einstein: “One should guard against preaching to young people success in the customary form as the main aim in life. The most important motive for work in school and in life is pleasure in work, pleasure in its result, and the knowledge of the value to the rest of the community.” The second was from Gandhi: “Live as if you were to die tomorrow. Learn as if you were to live forever.” This was all well and good, but what the course lacked was a discussion of what seemed to be the most important question for anyone undertaking his own venture: Do you have the stomach for it? It was easy to start something, but were you ready for that wet Wednesday afternoon eighteen months into the plan when customers were still scarce, your investors were losing faith, and you were running up credit card debt to pay your staff? Max, a German student, was one of the few in the class who had raw experience like this, having set up a successful financial data firm in Germany. He complained that sitting through each session of The Entrepreneurial Manager was “like hearing virgins talking about sex.” He received the lowest possible grade for the course, which told you all you needed to know about the futility of HBS grading."
- VC firms tend to invest in people more than ideas, so Bain’s involvement was a vote of confidence in Rodger’s ability to make things happen.Now we had to write a business plan to go with our audio presentation. Once again, Bo swung into action, and overnight he had compiled twenty elegant PowerPoint slides describing us and our plan. Rodger’s only advice was that we put our biographies up front, as this was the single most important slide. Cash flow forecasts were necessary to show you had actually thought about the business model, but otherwise meaningless. What mattered was us. Could we make this happen? And happen big? “Most ideas are good ideas,” said Rodger. “The differentiator is how they get implemented. And that’s about you. You’ll be great. They’ll love you.”
- When pitching to a VC, it was vital to “get them juiced in the first five minutes. Get them captured and fully engaged quickly.” I envisaged a spoiled, hyperactive five-year-old deciding our fate. “Make them see the business pain of the customer, then move into why your team is good and so on,” the e-mail continued. “Do not start with Macro conditions . . . tell them a story . . . make them understand . . . then move into the opportunity. Customer interviews are great . . . how many customers have you talked to? Is there a real problem . . . how many said they will pay? What is your sales channel . . . direct or indirect . . . how do you get to the end user? . . . Use the HBS platform while you have it . . . aim high, solicit big players for input and advice . . . Sell with personal passion . . . have to make the personal connection.” I got the point. Sell yourself. Know your customer. Know what you’re going to do with the money. And don’t let yourself get screwed.
- Jon told me that meetings with VCs, in his experience, followed a very predictable pattern. During the first few minutes, everyone was excited. He traced a line moving upward. Then the VC started to tire of your presentation. The line began to move down. Eventually you were back at neutral. At that point, the questioning began. How big can this thing be? Rather like Hollywood executives who could envisage new films only as derivatives of others—“It’s Star Wars meets Pirates of the Caribbean!”—VCs liked to feel reassured that the project they were looking at could be the next version of whatever was hot at the moment. “It’s kind of a MySpace crossed with Skype.” “This is the moment to strike,” Jon said. “Just as the VC is talking about the hot businesses of the moment, you should look off into a corner of the room and smile. Perhaps shake your head. You’re trying to tell the VC you’ve heard all this before and he is no better than the herd. You are disappointed in his lack of imagination. This totally freaks them out.” He demonstrated his faraway gaze and the gently exasperated laugh.
- In the HBS classroom, the future VCs all affected a similar manner, speaking in a measured monotone, keeping their notes in a leather portfolio, wearing chinos, tucked-in dress shirts, and baseball caps. The comments they made were never surprising, sticking close to the frameworks we were taught. Whereas the bankers were often argumentative and difficult, the VCs liked to affect calm under pressure. They loved to poke holes in business plans by saying things like “I’d like to see more customer data” or “I question the founder’s motivation.” They enjoyed sitting in judgment and looking terribly pleased with themselves, to the point where all you wanted to do was slap them to life and demand they do something.
- “They say this is your chance to change industry, but very few are succeeding. You see, the problem is that the path of least resistance is to do banking or consulting. Now, if you wanted to do either of those, you probably could. But if you wanted to get out of them, you really have to fight,” he said, driving a fist into his palm. “If you don’t have experience in an industry, they don’t want you, so you end up going back to the industries you do have experience in.”
- It was in an essay called “Tough-Mindedness and the Case Method”: "William James, a great teacher of psychology and philosophy at Harvard during the early years of this century, made the useful distinction between people who are tough-minded and people who are tender-minded. These terms have nothing to do with levels of ethical conduct; the toughness referred to is toughness of the intellectual apparatus, toughness of the spirit, not toughness of the heart. Essentially, it is the attitude and the qualities and the training that enable one to seize on facts and make these facts a basis for intelligent, courageous action. The tough-minded have a zest for tackling hard problems. They dare to grapple with the unfamiliar and wrest useful truth from stubborn new facts. They are not dismayed by change for they know that change at an accelerated tempo is the pattern of living, the only pattern on which successful action can be based. Above all, the tough-minded do not wall themselves in with comfortable illusions. They do not rely on the easy precepts of tradition or on mere conformity to regulations. They know that the answers are not in the book."
- A few weeks into the semester, this process of self-examination continued with a personal development exercise called “My Reflected Best-Self.” The instructions read, The Reflected Best-Self Feedback Exercise differs from other performance feedback mechanisms in its explicit focus on understanding how key constituents experience individuals when they leverage their strengths constructively . . . \[It\] encourages people to create a developmental agenda for leveraging their reflected best-self and expanding their capacity to add value in work organizations. This exercise also enables people to reflect on how leaders might create an environment where others can engage their best-self and work maximally from positions of strength.
- We were expected to craft our own best-self portraits by answering the following questions: "How does your best-self profile correspond with the sorts of things you spend the bulk of your time doing? What situations or contexts encourage your best- self to emerge? What keeps you from operating at your best more of the time? How can you prioritize your life so that you maximize the potential for your best-self every day? What can you do differently? What might you consider not doing anymore? Are there certain contexts you can put yourself in to maximize your potential?"
- The first point is to do something you enjoy, because if you don’t enjoy it you’re unlikely to be any good at it. Second, deliver the results, whatever you’re doing. Third, codify the lessons learned. Since HBS, she said, she had experienced 1.5 successes, 1.5 failures, and 1 gigantic home run. Fourth, be patient and stick around good people and good things. Fifth, build a team and share credit. Sixth, be fun to work with. Seventh, ask what you don’t know or understand. Eighth, don’t take yourself too seriously. Ninth, never, ever compromise your integrity.
- It was about an HBS professor called Jai Jaikumar. He was an Indian who loved climbing in the Himalayas. But as an undergraduate in India he had suffered a terrible fall, tumbling thousands of feet over rocks and trees, snow and ice. He was badly injured and lost his climbing companion. After walking for twenty-four hours in acute pain, he stumbled across a small hut in a clearing. A shepherdess took him in, fed him, and tended to his wounds. Then she carried him on her back for three days to the nearest village, from where he traveled for two more days on a donkey to the nearest hospital. When he recovered, he resumed his academic career, which brought him to America and eventually Harvard, where he specialized in manufacturing science. But he never forgot the shepherdess, and when he could afford to, he built a school in her village and raised money to pay for teachers and supplies. He always encouraged his students to enjoy and celebrate their lives instead of becoming stressed out. Success, he taught them, was the result of good fortune, and this brought obligations to others. He died at the age of fifty-three while mountain climbing in Ecuador.
- His brother-in-law had been to HBS and loved it. After what he thought was a poor interview with a “typical Spanish investment banker with cement in his hair,” Luis was elated to be accepted. Arriving on campus, he was surprised by the diversity of people but also by how young they seemed. “There are lots of people who are young. They are analytically and technically very sharp, but I can recognize the skills people have, and it was surprising to me that there was so little experience in the class. People spoke like they had experience, but often I’d be sitting in class thinking ‘practically, what you’re saying would never work.’ ”
- Finishing the exams, I realized how much I had learned about business and myself during those first five months. It was strange no longer to have a professional identity. I had become used to thinking of myself as a journalist, and abandoning that had been harder than I had imagined.
- The best advice on choosing a career, Buffett said, was to find something you loved. After that, the money would seem unimportant.You could run the best laundry in the world, but if what you were doing was quite simple and thousands of others could do it, you were not going to make any money. You lacked, as Felix liked to say, “a great strategy.” A beautifully run restaurant with the greatest chef in the world could be an economic disaster, while owning a few grubby fast-food franchises could make you a millionaire. Being very good at doing something was absolutely no guarantee of financial success. I recalled Steenburgh in marketing telling us, “A good product alone won’t get you there.” So the first challenge for the strategist was picking the right thing to do.
- Felix showed us a graph of the distribution of returns on equity of major American companies over the past twenty years. Most returned between 10 and 15 percent a year. But a few had returns on equity over 20 percent. What were they doing that enabled them to do this? The most profitable companies year after year tended to be in a few sectors: "pharmaceuticals, high-technology, financial services, discount department stores, and oil. The worst major industry to be in was airlines. There were exceptions, such as Southwest, which had done phenomenally well. But even Southwest, we had to assume, would eventually struggle to escape the broader trends of its industry. Picking the right industry, one with a sound structure, where your chances of making a profit were highest, was where good strategy began."
- “What Is Strategy?,” that laid out the five forces he believed determined a company’s ability to capture value. They are: "barriers to entry, supplier power, customer power, substitutes, and rivalry, complements are those products that might enhance your own."
- The notion of “the more you practice the better you get” is known as the learning curve and was first observed by business academics during the Second World War. The more factories produced military aircraft, the faster the planes came off the production line and the better they were. Companies that move up the learning curve fastest tend to do better than their rivals.
- You want to build a system in which every activity, including marketing, supports the others. It is the difference between having great individual players and a great team.
- If they are ranked lower and cannot be improved, GE assumes it is not the best owner for that company and sells. The ownership test asks whether your business needs to own a certain asset to create value. McDonald’s decided long ago that it was far better off selling franchises and then servicing them than owning millions of parcels of real estate. A fashion designer does not need to own the factories that produce her clothes, provided she can be sure the clothes will be made to her specifications. Sound contracts and long-term relationships, Felix explained, could be far less hassle than ownership.
- One of the most remarkable companies we studied was called Li and Fung, which was founded in 1906 in Canton as a trading company, helping English and American merchants get access to Chinese factories. Based in Hong Kong, it now managed the supply chains for many of the world’s largest retailers and manufacturers. In 1976, Victor Fung, the grandson of the founder and a professor at HBS, returned to Hong Kong to take over the firm. He and his younger brother, William, a Harvard MBA, decided to expand the scope of the company’s operations. Instead of being an intermediary between foreign companies and Hong Kong suppliers, Li and Fung built relationships throughout Taiwan, Korea, Singapore, and eventually deeper into China. It went from simply fulfilling customer requests to developing unique production programs that allowed manufacturers to create products of a quality and cost they never thought possible. If you wanted shirts made in Asia, Li and Fung would know separate places for cotton, buttons, and stitching and be able to move the unfinished product from one place to another and still deliver it cheaper than if you had picked a single factory. They called what they did “dispersed manufacturing,” and their staff, “little John Waynes,” because they spent their days “standing in the middle of the wagon train, shooting at all the bad guys.” By the time we studied Li and Fung, the firm was working with 7,500 suppliers in twenty-six countries and owned none of them. It organized design, engineering, and production planning, material sourcing, physical production, quality control, and global shipping for hundreds of well-known clients and yet it owned almost no physical assets. Unless you were in the industry you would never have known its na"me." At the end of our class discussion of the firm, the projector screen dropped down and Victor Fung appeared via satellite linkup from Hainan Island in China to take questions. He talked about the fragmentation of the global supply chain, how even the tiniest step was becoming the preserve of specialists, and how Li and Fung helped customers find their way through the maze.
- MBAs are rather like scientists. They learn things about the world that they are not expected to abuse. Biologists are taught biology with the expectation that they will not assist in germ warfare. Likewise, MBAs are taught accounting on the condition that they do not then manipulate their company’s earnings or minimize taxes to such an extent that it amounts to evasion.
- We were introduced to two concepts every good negotiator should know ether or not they use these terms): "BATNA and ZOPA. BATNA is the “best alternative to a negotiated agreement.” Knowing your BATNA prevents you from making a bad deal. If the negotiation is going poorly, you know what your options are if it collapses or you decide to walk away. ZOPA is the “zone of possible agreement,” the range of scenarios you and your opponent are likely to agree upon. You should have a pretty clear idea of both your BATNA and ZOPA even before your negotiation begins.If the negotiations stall, the negotiator should “go to the balcony” to gain perspective and then try to reframe the issues, moving from defensive positions to shared interests, from hostility to problem- solving. Then he can set about “building a golden bridge” from his position to his goal. Power, we were told, was a tool to be used to educate the other party rather than to escalate the intensity."
- New MBAs joining a top private equity Pfirm such as Blackstone, KKR, Texas Pacific Group, or Bain Capital, could expect to earn $400,000 in their first year. First-year investment bankers, by contrast, could expect maybe half of that, provided everything went well. To exacerbate the bankers’ inferiority, they knew they would probably have to spend most of their time raising money and pitching ideas for their friends in private equity. Investment banking was considered a second-tier career. You could earn $200,000 a year straight out of school, and your peers would still think you had failed.
- Students would talk about how much more interesting it was to acquire and run companies than simply to provide banking services. Private equity gave you an ownership stake that investment banking did not. The principle/agent problem of how to align the interests of managers and employees with shareholders to maximize performance came closer to being solved by the private equity model in which managers and owners were more tightly linked. But, as usual, the money was the main attraction, and the money came courtesy of debt. It took me several months at HBS to disabuse myself of the notion that debt was a bad thing.
- The difference between corporate leaders and those who start their own businesses, I had observed, was startling. The latter come across as so much smarter and independent-minded, so much less prone to platitudes, so much more comfortable in their own skins. There seems to be an anarchic streak in anyone who has taken a real risk in his life. And even when it has to burn its way through a pinstriped suit, it shows. The entrepreneurs who came to campus—from hedge fund pioneers such as Richard Perry; to Barry Diller, the media baron and founder of IAC; to Paul Orfalea, the founder of Kinko’s—seemed to be both enamored of their own skills and hard work and appreciative of the luck it had taken for them to succeed. Despite being dogged, competitive Darwinian types, they were more understanding of the world and its insanity, somehow more forgiving. They reminded me of generals who had experienced war, while all the corporate stiffs and consultants and lawyers and bankers were like the politicians who sent men into battle, with no grasp of the consequences.
- In answer to the inevitable question about what qualities he sought in a job candidate, he said, “a reasonable degree of intelligence, a strong work ethic, the ability to get along with others, a desire to build something important, the ability to keep one’s ego in check.” His most important piece of career advice, though, was even simpler: "“be a principal or a decision maker, not a service provider.” Principals make all the money. They can turn the cell phones off on weekends. They are the ones for whom everyone else runs around. They possess the grail: control over their ti"me.""
- Steve Schwarzman grew up in the suburbs of Philadelphia, where his father ran a dry goods store. He attended Yale as an undergraduate, where he was elected to the Skull and Bones society the year after George W. Bush. Both men later attended Harvard Business School. After obtaining his MBA, Schwarzman headed to Wall Street, where he rose to be head of the mergers department at Lehman Brothers. In the mid-1980s, the firm was ripped apart by competing factions, and Schwarzman left with his fellow banker, Pete Peterson, to set up Blackstone. While many financiers shy away from publicity, Schwarzman courted it. He lived in a palatial apartment on Park Avenue, attended society events, and reveled in his status.When Schwarzman started Blackstone, he suffered the agonies of anyone going their own way in business. “You have to really like pain and suffering,” he said. “Just because you start and make an announcement and assume they’ll come, they don’t co"me." Even if you sell, they don’t buy. Nine out of ten businesses that are started fail. If that’s the statistic, you know it’s not working for you. So to get from zero to some element of significant success, defined by yourself, you have to be exceptionally resilient.” It took him until his nineteenth meeting to find anyone who would invest money in Blackstone. It was the head of an insurance company’s investment fund, who pledged him $100 million over a tuna sandwich.
- Asked to explain his business, Schwarzman said, “We raise large amounts of money . . . and then we buy companies. Then we borrow three dollars for every dollar of equity in the deal.” He compared the search for companies to buy to dating. A lot of different factors lead to success. Part of it is figuring out how fast a company can grow and what can be done to assist that growth. And then there is the financing. How much debt could be loaded onto the company? How far could the operations be squeezed? To understand all of this, Schwarzman said, you need a combination of sharp analytical skills and a keen instinct for what will and won’t work, where you are in an economic cycle and, as he put it, “what’s gonna get you into trouble.” He compared his business to basketball, where the skill is not just repeatedly putting the ball in the hoop from one point on the court but, rather, being able to score from all over the court, being guarded by different people of different sizes and skills. Then, of course, there’s hard work, empathy, and “having a sense of where the world is going next.”But then even after all of this, he believed in a curious genetic predisposition to success. “There are some people who are constant winners in the game of life; from junior high school to high school and college, there are certain people who just have a knack for making things work in good times and bad times.” It was a version of Napoleon’s preference for a lucky general over a good one. They were the “talented tenth” who made the world run. For them, life’s challenges just toppled at the slightest touch. For others, it was one damn thing after another. Sitting atop his pile, with his wood sprite’s grin, Schwarzman left no doubt about what he saw in the mirror each morning. Life was a game of winners and losers. And there, staring back, was one humongous winner. Why wouldn’t we all want to be like Steve?
- Luis, the Franco-Argentine, complained to me that many people felt HBS failed in its promise to give people a new start. “They say this is your chance to change industry, but very few are succeeding. You see, the problem is that the path of least resistance is to do banking or consulting. Now, if you wanted to do either of those, you probably could. But if you wanted to get out of them, you really have to fight,” he said, driving a fist into his palm. “If you don’t have experience in an industry, they don’t want you, so you end up going back to the industries you do have experience in.”As I reflected on that first year, I came across a description of the HBS learning model written in 1954 by Malcolm McNair, a former professor at the school. It was in an essay called “Tough-Mindedness and the Case Method”: "William James, a great teacher of psychology and philosophy at Harvard during the early years of this century, made the useful distinction between people who are tough-minded and people who are tender-minded. These terms have nothing to do with levels of ethical conduct; the toughness referred to is toughness of the intellectual apparatus, toughness of the spirit, not toughness of the heart. Essentially, it is the attitude and the qualities and the training that enable one to seize on facts and make these facts a basis for intelligent, courageous action. The tough-minded have a zest for tackling hard problems. They dare to grapple with the unfamiliar and wrest useful truth from stubborn new facts. They are not dismayed by change for they know that change at an accelerated tempo is the pattern of living, the only pattern on which successful action can be based. Above all, the tough-minded do not wall themselves in with comfortable illusions. They do not rely on the easy precepts of tradition or on mere conformity to regulations. They know that the answers are not in the book."
- The challenge Moore addresses is that many new products struggle to move from small markets of enthusiasts over into the mass market. He calls the enthusiasts “visionaries,” people who buy on promise, the first in line for the newest gizmos. The mass market comprises the “pragmatists,” those who just want the damned thing to work. Among the solutions Moore proposes is identifying those people who affect buying decisions in the mass market. If you are making fancy handbags, the way to go from selling a few to selling millions might be to persuade a Hollywood movie star to carry one. Another way would be to convince the relevant channel of your worth. If Wal-Mart decided to sell your product, you would be almost guaranteed to sell a lot of it, regardless of whether the end consumer had ever heard of you before.Constantly moving from place to place, changing careers and specialization, meant you would never develop the reputation and deep networks that helped entrepreneurial ventures take off. Having people know that you know what you are doing really matters. “You really don’t know what you’re doing until you’ve done it a couple of times,” he told us. “And then the world changes.” Even if you’ve built a reputation and developed experience, you still have to revel in uncertainty. Lassiter emphasized having people around you who could talk frankly to you in such a way that you would listen.While taking this class, I read the former Treasury secretary Robert Rubin’s autobiography. For much of his career, Rubin was a revered risk arbitrageur at Goldman Sachs. He would spend hours sketching out probability calculations on yellow legal pads. It was an approach he brought to government. His entire way of thinking was about understanding risk and reward. When he was Treasury secretary and the Mexican economy imploded, he tried to calculate the scale of the bailout America should offer against the risk of the Mexican economy foundering for years to co"me." There was no political calculation here. That would be left to others. What Rubin brought to the party was this sense that every risk of every outcome was calculable, and if that was the case, it was possible to limit and prepare for the probability of the worst outcomes occurring. Rubin wrote that the risks most people ignored were the very low probability risks of catastrophic outcomes. They spent an inordinate amount of time worrying about the 20 percent chance of having a bad day and no time thinking about the 1 percent chance of their entire life being turned upside down. For the risk arb, the 0.1 percent risk of losing $100,000 from your savings is identical to the 20 percent chance of losing your wallet containing $500. The present value cost of both outcomes is $100. Once this way of thinking had burned itself into my brain, it was hard to think any other way. Everywhere I looked in my own life, there seemed to be small risks of total disaster, to which I had never given much thought. Leaving our son with a baby-sitter seemed the most obvious. Perhaps the odds of the baby-sitter turning out to be a kidnapper are 0.01 percent. But what would be the cost of losing him? Infinite. If you thought about this in a Rubin framework, you would only ever entrust your child to someone in whom you had 100 percent confidence.I needed a hotshot by my side. The moment Coval said, “Pick a partner,” I dashed off an e-mail to Chad, the Section A finance stud. “Chad: "You have to be my partner. If not, I am screwed. Completely screwed.” I turned around to see him stuffing his hand into his mouth to stifle a laugh. He looked down and nodded. Across the room, I saw another man from our section banging his fist on his desk. He had e-mailed Chad within seconds of "me." But he was too late. I had snared the King.A senior journalist on the Financial Times once told me that the real secret to making money was wanting to make money. Not in the sense of “oh, I’d like to make a bit more money.” But every day waking up and thinking, right, look at all that money sloshing around out there. How am I going to divert as much of that as possible into my bank account? But his point was that business success, all other things being equal, was a question largely of motivation. His proof lay in the range of people who made great fortunes, from Mafia bosses to Stanford computer science Ph.D.s, from the men selling vegetable peelers on late-night television to the quantitative geniuses who traded derivatives. People who are barely literate can do much better than those with an alphabet soup of graduate degrees. Business in this sense is not like law or medicine, where every practitioner needs to know a certain body of facts. At most levels, it is a more primal pursuit, requiring character, guts, instinct, leadership, and the application of pure common sense. The last thing it is about is frameworks, spreadsheets, and academic papers. These are just tiny props in a far bigger drama. Consequently, many people have argued that business cannot be taught, only experienced and learned. In his book What They Don’t Teach You at Harvard Business School, the late sports agent Mark McCormack wrote, “In fairness to Harvard Business School, what they don’t teach you is what they can’t teach you, which is how to read people and how to use that knowledge to get what you want.” He said that early in his career he made the mistake of hiring Harvard MBAs, assuming they would have the confidence and expertise to solve certain problems. Instead, he found them to be “congenitally naïve or victims of their business training. The result was a kind of real-life learning disability—a failure to read people properly or to size up situations and an uncanny knack for forming the wrong perceptions.” McCormack concluded that graduate degrees were no guarantee of “business smarts.”"
- My motivation came from having left my job and incurred large debts to come to the school with a family.
- The first few minutes were personal stuff—“why had I gone to business school” questions. In the second half, my interviewer set what he called “big, hairy, audacious goals” and asked me how I would reach them. For example, how would I develop an electronic reading device, market it, and get it into the hands of five million people in three months. Google, he said, liked big, hairy goals. I told him I’d try to do a tie-in with Oprah’s Book Club or perhaps an educational book publisher and popularize the device on college and high- school campuses.
- At a company like Procter and Gamble, which made commodity products such as toothpaste and toilet paper, marketing was king. You were never going to distinguish your toilet paper from a competitor’s on functionality alone. It was all about the brand and the way you marketed it. The most senior managers at P&G tended to rise through marketing and sales, and it is what drove the business. At Google, marketing was treated as an afterthought. The marketers fought fires as they arose, tried to offer some customer feedback and ideas for launching new products. But the department was mostly ignored and understaffed. Engineering was where the action was. It was understandable. Google grew to be a multibillion-dollar company without spending a dime on advertising. The excellence of its search product spoke for itself. Such success was a computer scientist’s fantasy. Build a wonderful product and people use it in droves. No need for the fluff and hype of advertising. These were deeply practical people who loved things that worked, hated things that didn’t, and were not going to be swayed by a twenty-foot-high billboard telling them a brand of underpants would make them more attractive to women.One woman in my section turned down a marketing job at Google because she said she would be standing on the other side of the fence from the rest of the company just waiting for them to toss over a sack load of products when they were ready for release. Marketing would never be part of how Google developed products. The department was just there to keep the various freaks and misfits who populated the engineering department from ever having to deal with the world.
- Porter’s analytical approach began with what he called the diamond. This was a way of assessing the quality of an economic environment by putting all the forces that affected it into four separate buckets and analyzing how they helped or hindered one another to create a good environment for business. It allowed you to get beyond the natural advantages of any particular economy—large oil reserves, for example—and start to understand the causes of sustainable competitiveness. You took a country, region, or city and looked at the rivalry between companies, the demand from consumers, the availability of skilled labor or capital, and the supporting network of industries. Each corner of the diamond could be unpacked and investigated, but overall it allowed you to see through to the potential sources of competitive advantage. Porter believed that the fundamental unit for thinking about competitiveness was not the individual company or sector but the “cluster.” To understand the success of Wall Street, for example, it was insufficient to credit the banking talents of a few executives, or the organizational setup at a few firms. You had to look at the presence of so many firms and financiers working in such a tight space, all the terrific universities in and around New York City turning out gifted graduates, the proximity of first-rate corporate lawyers, the courts and the legal framework, the exchanges, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the range of other businesses and corporate headquarters in the city. Together they made Wall Street what it was. It was the strength of the cluster, not the individual firm or sector, that mattered, and the strategist aiming to spur economic progress should work to develop every part of the cluster.In the washing machine case,we were discussing whether the business should try to survive in the face of low-costAsian competition when I put my hand up and was called on. I said the owner of thebusiness should sell out now. He was not playing to his competitive advantage. It wasthe right answer for the business school. But Porter stared at me, folded his arms, andlooked around the class. “Who thinks he should sell?” A student from the KennedySchool raised her hand and said that perhaps the owner of the business should keepgoing and that if Latin America was ever to have a home-grown appliance business, itneeded to persevere and not sell out at the first opportunity. This was what Porter hadwanted to hear—not my blinkered, manufactured MBA answer. I had been thinkingsolely of the competitiveness of the business, not of the people, country, and region itrepresented. I should have known better. Had I built a washing machinemanufacturer from the ground up in Costa Rica? Had I defied all the odds to spendtwenty years building factories, hiring employees, and developing a supply chain andmarketing strategy? No. But I felt comfortable enough advising the founder to sell outrather than try to build something he and his country could be proud of. This was why people hated MBAs. Too much cost-benefit analysis, too little humanity.I once asked a hedge fund manager in New York about the reckless way credit was sold to people who could ill afford it. I said they would be ruined. They would lose their homes and their possessions. Where were the checks on all this? Who was helping to teach people about responsible borrowing? What would happen to all these firms lending like crazy when people stopped paying back their loans? The hedge fund manager looked at me like I was a madman and said, “It’s just economic.” He meant that over time these borrowers would learn their lesson. The bankrupted lenders would be bought cheaply by other investors and turned around. The economic wheel would keep turning, no matter how many lives had been crushed against it. However true, it was also unpleasant. In Porter’s class, I realized that my response to the appliance company’s problem had placed me on the dark side. However technically correct an analysis might be, it could also be too rational. Achieving the balance between reason and emotion would never cease to be a challenge.
- This was the crux of Rivkin’s course: "always be alert to a better way of doing everything, never stop innovating.To illustrate the polluting effect of a whiner, he said, “if I had my favorite bowl of ice cream over here and a bowl of shit over here, if I took one speck of shit and put it in the ice cream, would you eat the ice cream?”"
- After so many months of agony with Excel and watching the ex-bankers let their fingers pirouette across their keyboards, Gilbert’s words were like a drink of cold water. They cut to the heart of what had nagged me about finance: "the fact that every model we built seemed rooted in backward-looking assumptions and diminished the essence of every business, the very people who ran it. We were told again and again that finance was really all about the assumptions you made about the future, but when it came down to it, we all spent far more time tinkering with the details of these models than developing the quality of those assumptions. Models felt real. You could feed in one set of numbers and get another. Assumptions?"
- Environmental groups, for example, did not always tackle the worst offenders but rather the ones most likely to be embarrassed and to bring their cause the greatest attention. Companies that yielded and collaborated with these campaign groups often emerged better than those that tried to argue with them on the facts.
- That I was sticking to my guns. That I had paid attention to what every single guest speaker had said. Do what you love. Don’t settle. Take risk now, because it will be much harder later in life. If you love what you do, the money will follow. A clear hierarchy had also emerged within the class. At the top were those going to the private equity firms and hedge funds on salaries of hundreds of thousands of dollars a year. People called them “studs,” as in “he’s a total finance stud, going to Blackstone.” Then there were those going into investment banking and consulting, cliquey groups all swapping notes on which office they would be heading to, which partners they would be working for. Five percent of the class was going to McKinsey, around forty-five students. Among those interested in technology, several had snagged jobs at the top venture capital firms in Silicon Valley and Boston. Seven more were off to Google, nine to Microsoft. Once you added them up, finance, consulting, and major technology firms had taken 69 percent of the class. Right at the bottom of this hierarchy were those without jobs or even offers: "me."
- But for big companies with a number of MBA résumés to choose from, HBS alone was not enough. You needed to have been following the path to these companies long before.
- I would be delighted to have the opportunity to lend to a man so motivated to make money. J. P. Morgan said something along these lines in testimony to Congress. Morgan was being questioned by Samuel Untermeyer, a relentless corporate lawyer. Untermeyer asked Morgan if the main criterion for lending was the money or property of the borrower. “No, sir,” Morgan shot back. “The first thing is character.” “Before money or property?” Untermeyer asked. “Before money or property or anything else,” Morgan said. “A man I do not trust could not get money from me on all the bonds in Christendom.” The financial system turns on personalities as much as anything else.
- It took Perelman until his mid-thirties to really get going, which gave me some hope. I still, just, had time to catch up. But once he got going, he was unstoppable. A multimillionaire by the time he was thirty-six, a billionaire soon afterward. Along with the billions came the divorces, four in total. My first reaction, after recognizing Perelman, was delight. How ordinary he looked! How miserable and shifty-looking on this gray Manhattan morning. The last thing I wanted a multibillionaire to look was happy.
- The statistics showed that a large number of graduates left the first job they took out of HBS within the first year. The crazy environment and tight parameters of a business school forced people to make bad decisions, which they quickly rectified once back in the real world.
- He said that the most important thing he had learned was that “you never should consider yourself the smartest guy in the room. I was surprised how valuable the input during the class discussions was.”“It was very valuable to see a lot of business situations. Now, being a CEO, I know that this shit happened to every other guy who was a protagonist in those cases. "I was a pretty reasonable guy before going to HBS, but now I always have questions, I never make a statement.” We saw a lot of businesses from the inside, so business doesn’t seem like rocket science anymore. It’s just about finding the right approach. The veil has been removed. The practical knowledge, you forget most of that anyway. You can pick up the models from a textbook. But seeing all those situations and listening to other people’s opinions, that was the thing.”
- Oleg had found his calling, but it had taken a few months. Straight out of HBS, he had taken a consulting job in London. “If you’re not sure what you want to do, or if you want to win some time to get some options, consulting opens some doors. I spent five months, and even after such a short time, I was getting a lot of calls from headhunters. It’s like a continued job search. Especially when you change countries. They treat you very nicely. They find you an apartment, transfer all your stuff, they give you a signing bonus, they give you time to look for a better job. For people who are afraid to make choices, it’s a safe place.”
- I called Nate, a member of Section A who had lived in the same building as we did during the second year. He was now working for a biotech firm in the Pacific Northwest. He had joined his company when the stock price was over seventy dollars and now it was around seven dollars. He had witnessed rounds of layoffs and serious business reversals. But he was as sanguine and upbeat as ever. “It has been difficult here, but I’ve learned a ton.” The single biggest thing he had taken from HBS, he said, was confidence. “At conventions, I’ll just go up to CEOs of other companies and just start talking. HBS gave me the confidence that I have a right to be wherever I am. In a meeting, speaking up, talking to a CEO. Maybe that right’s not justified, but I definitely feel it. Just don’t ask me to do a discounted cash flow or tell you the three Ps of marketing. Or were there four Ps?”
- “I learned to think in a very different way. The way I explain things and break down an argument is different. In the beginning, when we first had thirty seconds to make a point in class, you didn’t get anywhere. By the end, you know how to say things quickly and you learn to think before you talk. But now my friends tell me to stop speaking like I’m in business school, always saying ‘there are two or three ways to look at this,’ even when we’re deciding where to go for dinner. It’s a very structured way of thinking. Maybe overstructured.”
- Ray Soifer, a graduate of the class of 1965 and a banking analyst, had been keeping track of the relationship between the condition of the American equity market and the percentage of Harvard MBA graduates choosing careers in financial services. Ten percent or less was a long-term buy signal. Thirty percent or more was a long-term sell. The choices of the class of 2006 told you the markets were soon to crash.
- One thing I had learned from studying so many entrepreneurs was that if you were going to start up a business, you had better be ready for a lot of thankless hard work while you got it off the ground.
- The bankers and hedge fund managers who came through Harvard complained that the problem they had in hiring HBS MBAs was that they thought they were smarter than they were. Wharton and Tuck graduates had them licked on the technical stuff.Robert McNamara, the U.S. secretary of defense during the Vietnam War, and member of the class of 1939. In his book In Retrospect, reflecting on the war, he wrote that while at Harvard he had developed “an approach to organizing human activities.” There were three steps: "“Define a clear objective . . . develop a plan to achieve that objective, and systematically monitor progress against the plan.” This was still the essence of the HBS method: strategy, planning, and measurement."
