---
id: "25p8j1s2qibxeuykzu6yt9g"
title: "'221028'"
desc: ''
updated: "1666983560827"
created: "1666979669344"
date: "2022-10-28"
categories: 
  - "research"
---


Started reading Greenlights by Mathew McConaughey, seems like a chill-wise book. 

If you don't ask the answer's always no. I'm not asking for what i want at office/from Shaily, need to push for what i want. Nothing wrong with that, worst case he say's no, thats fine. Have setup some time with him for Wed, will not be swayed away.

Reason i got stuck with Aster was because of this tendency, he asked me about Aster case, under time pressure (and some other pressure- being nice/agreeable??) i agreed to it. Fml!

Dude need to get back in shape, have gained 2 Kgs, i'm 72Kgs right now! Gotta cut down calories/late night dinners and pull up wights man!
Tell AJ/Balli that you need 45mins during the day for your workout, own it up!

Reference points of in past changes current perspective. When in a difficult situation look in past and think how you overcame a difficult situation or how your brain adapted (Aster case assignment- its going to suck for a while but then it'll get better, getting up early everyday while Skating, etc.)
It'll lead to gratitude, confidence, hope, inner strength. 

I get angry at papa, autonomously. Reason for this anger- irritated by his behaviour- very raw, no style, typical uncle, timid, boring person, always negative??


People are deadpan to be least vulnerable- me? i think so, hiding vulnerability/low confidence/esteem.



Feel like life is built on duality- pain-pleasure, birth-death, sadness-happiness, success-suffering/sacrificing, intelligence-knowing-you-don't know-enough, you can't separate them, they're glued together facets. A creative (a writer, actor) by allowing themselves solitude discover themselves, get to know thyself and thats when they peel of their layers to see core. Thats where they find their ideas/edge.